                         Contents

Preface                                                         xi

Acknowledgments                                                 xvii

CHAPTER 1 The Whats, Whos, and Whys of Quantitative

             Trading                                            1

Who Can Become a Quantitative Trader?                           2

The Business Case for Quantitative Trading                      4

Scalability                                                     5

Demand on Time                                                  5

The Nonnecessity of Marketing                                   7

The Way Forward                                                 8

CHAPTER 2 Fishing for Ideas                                     9

How to Identify a Strategy That Suits You                       12

Your Working Hours                                              12

Your Programming Skills                                         13

Your Trading Capital                                            13

Your Goal                                                       16

A Taste for Plausible Strategies and Their Pitfalls             17

How Does It Compare with a Benchmark and How Consistent

Are Its Returns?                                                18

How Deep and Long Is the Drawdown?                              21

How Will Transaction Costs Affect the Strategy?                 22

Does the Data Suffer from Survivorship Bias?                    24

How Did the Performance of the Strategy Change over the Years?  24

                                                                vii
viii                                                          CONTENTS

    Does the Strategy Suffer from Data-Snooping Bias?                    25
    Does the Strategy "Fly under the Radar" of Institutional
                                                                         27
         Money Managers?                                               28
Summary
                                                                     31
CHAPTER 3 Backtesting
                                                                       32
Common Backtesting Platforms                                             32
    Excel                                                                32
    MATLAB                                                               35
    TradeStation                                                         35
    High-End Backtesting Platforms                                     36
                                                                         36
Finding and Using Historical Databases                                   40
    Are the Data Split and Dividend Adjusted?                            42
    Are the Data Survivorship Bias Free?                               43
    Does Your Strategy Use High and Low Data?                          50
                                                                         51
Performance Measurement                                                  52
Common Backtesting Pitfalls to Avoid                                   60
                                                                       65
    Look-Ahead Bias                                                    66
    Data-Snooping Bias
Transaction Costs                                                    69
Strategy Refinement
Summary                                                                69
                                                                       71
CHAPTER 4 Setting Up Your Business                                     75
                                                                       77
Business Structure: Retail or Proprietary?
Choosing a Brokerage or Proprietary Trading Firm                     79
Physical Infrastructure
Summary                                                                79
                                                                         81
CHAPTER 5 Execution Systems                                              84
                                                                       87
What an Automated Trading System Can Do for You
    Building a Semiautomated Trading System
    Building a Fully Automated Trading System

Minimizing Transaction Costs
Contents                                                 ix

Testing Your System by Paper Trading                     89

Why Does Actual Performance Diverge from Expectations?   90

Summary                                                  92

CHAPTER 6 Money and Risk Management                      95

Optimal Capital Allocation and Leverage                    95
Risk Management                                          103
Psychological Preparedness                               108
Summary                                                  111
Appendix: A Simple Derivation of the Kelly Formula when
                                                         112
    Return Distribution Is Gaussian
                                                         115
CHAPTER 7 Special Topics in Quantitative Trading

Mean-Reverting versus Momentum Strategies                116
Regime Switching                                         119
Stationarity and Cointegration                           126
Factor Models                                            133
What Is Your Exit Strategy?                              140
Seasonal Trading Strategies                              143
High-Frequency Trading Strategies                        151
Is It Better to Have a High-Leverage versus
                                                         153
    a High-Beta Portfolio?                               154
Summary
                                                         157
CHAPTER 8 Conclusion: Can Independent Traders
                    Succeed?                             161

Next Steps

Appendix A Quick Survey of MATLAB                        163
Bibliography                                             169
About the Author                                         173
Index                                                    175
             Preface

B y some estimates, quantitative or algorithmic trading now ac-
         counts for over one-third of the trading volume in the United
         States. There are, of course, innumerable books on the ad-
vanced mathematics and strategies utilized by institutional traders
in this arena. However, can an independent, retail trader benefit
from these algorithms? Can an individual with limited resources and
computing power backtest and execute their strategies over thou-
sands of stocks, and come to challenge the powerful industry par-
ticipants in their own game?

     I will show you how this can, in fact, be achieved.

WHO IS THIS BOOK FOR?

I wrote this book with two types of readers in mind:

 1. Aspiring independent ("retail") traders who are looking to start
     a quantitative trading business.

 2. Students of finance or other technical disciplines (at the un-
     dergraduate or MBA level) who aspire to become quantitative
     traders and portfolio managers at major institutions.

     Can these two very different groups of readers benefit from the
same set of knowledge and skills? Is there anything common be-
tween managing a $100 million portfolio and managing a $100,000
portfolio? My contention is that it is much more logical and sen-
sible for someone to become a profitable $100,000 trader before

                                                                                               xi
xii  PREFACE

becoming a profitable $100 million trader. This can be shown to be
true on many fronts.

    Many legendary quantitative hedge fund managers such as Dr.
Edward Thorp of the former Princeton-Newport Partners (Pound-
stone, 2005) and Dr. Jim Simons of Renaissance Technologies Corp.
(Lux, 2000) started their careers trading their own money. They did
not begin as portfolio managers for investment banks and hedge
funds before starting their own fund management business. Of
course, there are also plenty of counterexamples, but clearly this
is a possible route to riches as well as intellectual accomplishment,
and for someone with an entrepreneurial bent, a preferred route.

    Even if your goal is to become an institutional trader, it is still
worthwhile to start your own trading business as a first step. Physi-
cists and mathematicians are now swarming Wall Street. Few peo-
ple on the Street are impressed by a mere PhD from a prestigious
university anymore. What is the surest way to get through the door
of the top banks and funds? To show that you have a systematic
way to profits--in other words, a track record. Quite apart from
serving as a stepping stone to a lucrative career in big institutions,
having a profitable track record as an independent trader is an in-
valuable experience in itself. The experience forces you to focus on
simple but profitable strategies, and not get sidetracked by overly
theoretical or sophisticated theories. It also forces you to focus
on the nitty-gritty of quantitative trading that you won't learn from
most books: things such as how to build an order entry system that
doesn't cost $10,000 of programming resource. Most importantly, it
forces you to focus on risk management--after all, your own per-
sonal bankruptcy is a possibility here. Finally, having been an insti-
tutional as well as a retail quantitative trader and strategist at differ-
ent times, I only wish that I had read a similar book before I started
my career at a bank--I would have achieved profitability many
years sooner.

    Given these preambles, I won't make any further apologies in
the rest of the book in focusing on the entrepreneurial, indepen-
dent traders and how they can build a quantitative trading business
on their own, while hoping that many of the lessons would be useful
on their way to institutional money management as well.
Preface  xiii

WHAT KIND OF BACKGROUND DO YOU NEED?

Despite the scary-sounding title, you don't need to be a math or
computer whiz in order to use this book as a guide to start trading
quantitatively. Yes, you do need to possess some basic knowledge
of statistics, such as how to calculate averages, standard deviations,
or how to fit a straight line through a set of data points. Yes, you
also need to have some basic familiarity with Excel. But what you
don't need is any advanced knowledge of stochastic calculus, neural
networks, or other impressive-sounding techniques.

    Though it is true that you can make millions with nothing more
than Excel, it is also true that there is another tool that, if you are
proficient at it, will enable you to backtest trading strategies much
more efficiently, and may also allow you to retrieve and process
data much more easily than you otherwise can. This tool is called
MATLAB«, and it is a mathematical platform that many institutional
quantitative strategists and portfolio managers use. Therefore, I will
demonstrate how to backtest the majority of strategies using MAT-
LAB. In fact, I have included a brief tutorial in the appendix on how
to do some basic programming in MATLAB. For many retail traders,
MATLAB is too expensive to purchase, but there are cheaper alter-
natives, which I will mention in Chapter 3 on backtesting. Further-
more, many university students can either purchase a cheaper stu-
dent MATLAB license or they already have free access to it through
their schools.

WHAT WILL YOU FIND IN THIS BOOK?

This book is definitely not designed as an encyclopedia of quantita-
tive trading techniques or terminologies. It will not even be about
specific profitable strategies (although you can refine the few ex-
ample strategies embedded here to make them quite profitable.) In-
stead, this is a book that teaches you how to find a profitable strategy
yourself. It teaches you the characteristics of a good strategy, how
to refine and backtest a strategy to ensure that it has good historical
performance, and, more importantly, to ensure that it will remain
xiv                                               PREFACE

profitable in the future. It teaches you a systematic way to scale up
or wind down your strategies depending on their real-life profitabil-
ity. It teaches you some of the nuts and bolts of implementing an au-
tomated execution system in your own home. Finally, it teaches you
some basics of risk management, which is critical if you want to sur-
vive over the long term, and also some psychological pitfalls to avoid
if you want an enjoyable (and not just profitable) life as a trader.

    Even though the basic techniques for finding a good strategy
should work for any tradable securities, I have focused my ex-
amples on an area of trading I personally know best: statistical
arbitrage trading in stocks. While I discuss sources of historical
data on stocks, futures, and foreign currencies in the chapter on
backtesting, I did not include options because those are not in my
area of expertise.

    The book is organized roughly in the order of the steps that
traders need to undertake to set up their quantitative trading busi-
ness. These steps begin at finding a viable trading strategy (Chap-
ter 2), then backtesting the strategy to ensure that it at least has
good historical performance (Chapter 3), setting up the business
and technological infrastructure (Chapter 4), building an automated
trading system to execute your strategy (Chapter 5), and managing
the money and risks involved in holding positions generated by this
strategy (Chapter 6). I will then describe in Chapter 7 a number of
important advanced concepts with which most professional quan-
titative traders are familiar, and finally conclude in Chapter 8 with
reflections on how independent traders can find their niche and how
they can grow their business. I have also included an appendix that
contains a tutorial on using MATLAB.

    You'll see two different types of boxed material in this book:

r Sidebars containing an elaboration or illustration of a concept, and

r Examples, accompanied by MATLAB or Excel code.
Preface  xv

    For readers who want to learn more and keep up to date with
the latest news, ideas, and trends in quantitative trading, they are
welcome to visit my blog epchan.blogspot.com, where I will do my
best to answer their questions, as well as my premium content web
site epchan.com/subscriptions. My premium content web site con-
tains articles of a more advanced nature, as well as backtest results
of several profitable strategies. Readers of this book will have free
access to the premium content and will find the password in a later
chapter to enter that web site.

                                                                --ERNEST P. CHAN
                                                                  Toronto, Ontario

                                                                        August 2008
      Acknowledgments

M uch of my knowledge and experiences in quantitative trad-
           ing come from my colleagues and mentors at the var-
           ious investment banks (Morgan Stanley, Credit Suisse,
Maple Securities) and hedge funds (Mapleridge Capital, Millen-
nium Partners, MANE Fund Management), and I am very grate-
ful for their advice, guidance, and help over the years. Since I
became an independent trader and consultant, I have benefited
enormously from discussions with my clients, readers of my blog,
fellow bloggers, and various trader-collaborators. In particular, I
would like to offer thanks to Steve Halpern and Ramon Cum-
mins for reading parts of the manuscript and correcting some
of the errors; to John Rigg for suggesting some of the topics
for my blog, many of which found their way into this book; to
Ashton Dorkins, editor-in-chief of tradingmarkets.com, who helped
syndicate my blog; and to Yaser Anwar for publicizing it to read-
ers of his own very popular investment blog. I am also indebted to
editor Bill Falloon at John Wiley & Sons for suggesting this book,
and to my development editor, Emilie Herman, and production ed-
itor Christina Verigan for seeing this book through to fruition. Last
but not least, I thank Ben Xie for insisting that simplicity is the best
policy.

                                                                                 E.P.C.

                                                                                             xvii
Quantitative
   Trading
                                    CHAPTER 1

          The Whats,
       Whos, and Whys
        of Quantitative

             Trading

I f you are curious enough to pick up this book, you probably have
     already heard of quantitative trading. But even for readers who
     learned about this kind of trading from the mainstream media
before, it is worth clearing up some common misconceptions.

     Quantitative trading, also known as algorithmic trading, is the
trading of securities based strictly on the buy/sell decisions of com-
puter algorithms. The computer algorithms are designed and per-
haps programmed by the traders themselves, based on the histor-
ical performance of the encoded strategy tested against historical
financial data.

     Is quantitative trading just a fancy name for technical analysis,
then? Granted, a strategy based on technical analysis can be part of
a quantitative trading system if it can be fully encoded as computer
programs. However, not all technical analysis can be regarded as
quantitative trading. For example, certain chartist techniques such
as "look for the formation of a head and shoulders pattern" might
not be included in a quantitative trader's arsenal because they are
quite subjective and may not be quantifiable.

     Yet quantitative trading includes more than just technical anal-
ysis. Many quantitative trading systems incorporate fundamental
data in their inputs: numbers such as revenue, cash flow, debt-to-
equity ratio, and others. After all, fundamental data are nothing but

                                                                                                1
2  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

numbers, and computers can certainly crunch any numbers that are
fed into them! When it comes to judging the current financial per-
formance of a company compared to its peers or compared to its
historical performance, the computer is often just as good as hu-
man financial analysts--and the computer can watch thousands of
such companies all at once. Some advanced quantitative systems
can even incorporate news events as inputs: Nowadays, it is pos-
sible to use a computer to parse and understand the news report.
(After all, I used to be a researcher in this very field at IBM, work-
ing on computer systems that can understand approximately what a
document is about.)

    So you get the picture: As long as you can convert information
into bits and bytes that the computer can understand, it can be re-
garded as part of quantitative trading.

WHO CAN BECOME A
QUANTITATIVE TRADER?

It is true that most institutional quantitative traders received their
advanced degrees as physicists, mathematicians, engineers, or com-
puter scientists. This kind of training in the hard sciences is often
necessary when you want to analyze or trade complex derivative
instruments. But those instruments are not the focus in this book.
There is no law stating that one can become wealthy only by work-
ing with complicated financial instruments. (In fact, one can become
quite poor trading complex mortgage-backed securities, as the finan-
cial crisis of 2007ş08 and the demise of Bear Stearns have shown.)
The kind of quantitative trading I focus on is called statistical ar-
bitrage trading. Statistical arbitrage deals with the simplest finan-
cial instruments: stocks, futures, and sometimes currencies. One
does not need an advanced degree to become a statistical arbitrage
trader. If you have taken a few high schoolşlevel courses in math,
statistics, computer programming, or economics, you are probably
as qualified as anyone to tackle some of the basic statistical arbi-
trage strategies.
The Whats, Whos, and Whys of Quantitative Trading  3

    Okay, you say, you don't need an advanced degree, but surely
it gives you an edge in statistical arbitrage trading? Not necessarily.
I received a PhD from one of the top physics departments of the
world (Cornell's). I worked as a successful researcher in one of the
top computer science research groups in the world (at that temple of
high-techdom: IBM's T. J. Watson Research Center). Then I worked
in a string of top investment banks and hedge funds as a researcher
and finally trader, including Morgan Stanley, Credit Suisse, and so
on. As a researcher and trader in these august institutions, I had al-
ways strived to use some of the advanced mathematical techniques
and training that I possessed and applied them to statistical arbi-
trage trading. Hundreds of millions of dollars of trades later, what
was the result? Losses, more losses, and losses as far as the eye can
see, for my employers and their investors. Finally, I quit the finan-
cial industry in frustration, set up a spare bedroom in my home as
my trading office, and started to trade the simplest but still quan-
titative strategies I know. These are strategies that any smart high
school student can easily research and execute. For the first time
in my life, my trading strategies became profitable (one of which is
described in Example 3.6), and has been the case ever since. The
lesson I learned? As Einstein said: "Make everything as simple as
possible." But not simpler.

    (Stay tuned: I will detail more reasons why independent traders
can beat institutional money managers at their own game in
Chapter 8.)

    Though I became a quantitative trader through a fairly tradi-
tional path, many others didn't. Who are the typical independent
quantitative traders? Among people I know, they include a former
trader at a hedge fund that has gone out of business, a computer pro-
grammer who used to work for a brokerage, a former trader at one
of the exchanges, a former investment banker, a former biochemist,
and an architect. Some of them have received advanced technical
training, but others have only basic familiarity of high schoolşlevel
statistics. Most of them backtest their strategies using basic tools
like Excel, though others may hire programming contractors to help.
Most of them have at some point in their career been professionally
involved with the financial world but have now decided that being
4  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

independent suits their needs better. As far as I know, most of them
are doing quite well on their own, while enjoying the enormous free-
dom that independence brings.

    Besides having gained some knowledge of finance through their
former jobs, the fact that these traders have saved up a nest egg
for their independent venture is obviously important too. When one
plunges into independent trading, fear of losses and of being iso-
lated from the rest of the world is natural, and so it helps to have
both a prior appreciation of risks and some savings to lean on. It is
important not to have a need for immediate profits to sustain your
daily living, as strategies have intrinsic rates of returns that cannot
be hurried (see Chapter 6).

    Instead of fear, some of you are planning to trade because of
the love of thrill and danger, or an incredible self-confidence that
instant wealth is imminent. This is also a dangerous emotion to bring
to independent quantitative trading. As I hope to persuade you in
this chapter and in the rest of the book, instant wealth is not the
objective of quantitative trading.

    The ideal independent quantitative trader is therefore someone
who has some prior experience with finance or computer program-
ming, who has enough savings to withstand the inevitable losses and
periods without income, and whose emotion has found the right bal-
ance between fear and greed.

THE BUSINESS CASE FOR
QUANTITATIVE TRADING

A lot of us are in the business of quantitative trading because it is
exciting, intellectually stimulating, financially rewarding, or perhaps
it is the only thing we are good at doing. But for others who may have
alternative skills and opportunities, it is worth pondering whether
quantitative trading is the best business for you.

    Despite all the talk about untold hedge fund riches and dollars
that are measured in units of billions, in many ways starting a
quantitative trading business is very similar to starting any small
business. We need to start small, with limited investment (perhaps
The Whats, Whos, and Whys of Quantitative Trading  5

only a $50,000 initial investment), and gradually scale up the
business as we gain know-how and become profitable.

    In other ways, however, a quantitative trading business is very
different from other small businesses. Here are some of the most
important.

Scalability

Compared to most small businesses (other than certain dot-coms),
quantitative trading is very scalable (up to a point). It is easy to find
yourselves trading millions of dollars in the comfort of your own
home, as long as your strategy is consistently profitable. This is be-
cause scaling up often just means changing a number in your pro-
gram. This number is called leverage. You do not need to negotiate
with a banker or a venture capitalist to borrow more capital for your
business. The brokerages stand ready and willing to do that. If you
are a member of a proprietary trading firm (more on this later in
Chapter 4 on setting up a business), you may even be able to obtain
a leverage far exceeding that allowed by Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) Regulation T. It is not unheard of for a propri-
etary trading firm to let you trade a portfolio worth $2 million in-
traday even if you have only $50,000 equity in your account (a Î40
leverage). At the same time, quantitative trading is definitely not a
get-rich-quick scheme. You should hope to have steadily increasing
profits, but most likely it won't be 200 percent a year, unlike starting
a dot-com or a software firm. In fact, as I will explain in Chapter 6
on money and risk management, it is dangerous to overleverage in
pursuit of overnight riches.

Demand on Time

Running most small businesses takes a lot of your time, at least
initially. Quantitative trading takes relatively little of your time. By
its very nature, quantitative trading is a highly automated business.
Sometimes, the more you manually interfere with the system and
override its decision, the worse it will perform. (Again, more on this
in Chapter 6.)
6  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

    How much time you need to spend on day-to-day quantitative
trading depends very much on the degree of automation you have
achieved. For example, at a hedge fund I used to work for, some col-
leagues come into the office only once a month. The rest of the time,
they just sit at home and occasionally remotely monitor their office
computers, which are trading for them.

    I consider myself to be in the middle of the pack in terms of au-
tomation. The largest block of time I need to spend is in the morning
before the market opens: I typically need to run various programs to
download and process the latest historical data, read company news
that comes up on my alert screen, run programs to generate the or-
ders for the day, and then launch a few baskets of orders before
the market opens and start a program that will launch orders auto-
matically throughout the day. I would also update my spreadsheet
to record the previous day's profit and loss (P&L) of the different
strategies I run based on the brokerages' statements. All of this takes
about two hours.

    After that, I spend another half hour near the market close to di-
rect the programs to exit various positions, manually checking that
those exit orders are correctly transmitted, and closing down vari-
ous automated programs properly.

    In between market open and close, everything is supposed to be
on autopilot. Alas, the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak: I often
cannot resist the urge to take a look (sometimes many looks) at
the intraday P&L of the various strategies on my trading screens. In
extreme situations, I might even be transfixed by the huge swings
in P&L and be tempted to intervene by manually exiting positions.
Fortunately, I have learned to better resist the temptation as time
goes on.

    The urge to intervene manually is also strong when I have too
much time on my hands. Hence, instead of just staring at your trad-
ing screen, it is actually important to engage yourself in some other,
more healthful and enjoyable activities, such as going to the gym
during the trading day.

    When I said quantitative trading takes little of your time, I am
referring to the operational side of the business. If you want to grow
your business, or keep your current profits from declining due to
The Whats, Whos, and Whys of Quantitative Trading  7

increasing competition, you will need to spend time doing research
and backtesting on new strategies. But research and development of
new strategies is the creative part of any business, and it can be done
whenever you want to. So, between the market's open and close, I
do my research; answer e-mails; chat with other traders, collabora-
tors, or clients; go to the gym; and so on. I do some of that work in
the evening and on weekends, too, but only when I feel like it--not
because I am obligated to.

    When I generate more earnings, I will devote more software de-
velopment resources to further automate my process, so that the
programs can automatically start themselves up at the right time,
know how to download data automatically, maybe even know how
to interpret the news items that come across the newswire and take
appropriate actions, and shut themselves down automatically after
the market closes. When that day comes, the daily operation may
take no time at all, and it can run as it normally does even while I am
on vacation, as long as it can alert my mobile phone or a technical
support service when something goes wrong. In short, if you trea-
sure your leisure time or if you need time and financial resources
to explore other businesses, quantitative trading is the business
for you.

The Nonnecessity of Marketing

Here is the biggest and most obvious difference between quantita-
tive trading and other small businesses. Marketing is crucial to most
small businesses--after all, you generate your revenue from other
people, who base their purchase decisions on things other than price
alone. In trading, your counterparties in the financial marketplace
base their purchase decisions on nothing but the price. Unless you
are managing money for other people (which is beyond the scope of
this book), there is absolutely no marketing to do in a quantitative
trading business. This may seem obvious and trivial but is actually
an important difference, since the business of quantitative trading
allows you to focus exclusively on your product (the strategy and
the software), and not on anything that has to do with influencing
other people's perception of yourself. To many people, this may
8  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

be the ultimate beauty of starting your own quantitative trading
business.

THE WAY FORWARD

If you are convinced that you want to become a quantitative trader,
a number of questions immediately follow: How do you find the right
strategy to trade? How do you recognize a good versus a bad strat-
egy even before devoting any time to backtesting them? How do you
rigorously backtest them? If the backtest performance is good, what
steps do you need to take to implement the strategy, in terms of both
the business structure and the technological infrastructure? If the
strategy is profitable in initial real-life trading, how does one scale
up the capital to make it into a growing income stream while manag-
ing the inevitable (but, hopefully, only occasional) losses that come
with trading? These nuts and bolts of quantitative trading will be
tackled in Chapters 2 through 6.

    Though the list of processes to go through in order to get to the
final destination of sustained and growing profitability may seem
long and daunting, in reality it may be faster and easier than many
other businesses. When I first started as an independent trader, it
took me only three months to find and backtest my first new strat-
egy, set up a new brokerage account with $100,000 capital, imple-
ment the execution system, and start trading the strategy. The strat-
egy immediately became profitable in the first month. Back in the
dot-com era, I started an Internet software firm. It took about 3 times
more investment, 5 times more human-power, and 24 times longer
to find out that the business model didn't work, whereupon all in-
vestors including myself lost 100 percent of their investments. Com-
pared to that experience, it really has been a breeze trading quanti-
tatively and profitably.
