                                    CHAPTER 2

      Fishing for Ideas

                     Where Can We Find
                       Good Strategies?

T his is the surprise: Finding a trading idea is actually not the
       hardest part of building a quantitative trading business. There
       are hundreds, if not thousands, of trading ideas that are in
the public sphere at any time, accessible to anyone at little or no
cost. Many authors of these trading ideas will tell you their com-
plete methodologies in addition to their backtest results. There are
finance and investment books, newspapers and magazines, main-
stream media web sites, academic papers available online or in the
nearest public library, trader forums, blogs, and on and on. Some of
the ones I find valuable are listed in Table 2.1, but this is just a small
fraction of what is available out there.

     In the past, because of my own academic bent, I regularly
perused the various preprints published by business school pro-
fessors or downloaded the latest online finance journal articles
to scan for good prospective strategies. In fact, the first strategy
I traded when I became independent was based on such academic
research. (It was a version of the PEAD strategy referenced in
Chapter 7.) Increasingly, however, I have found that many strate-
gies described by academics are either too complicated, out of date
(perhaps the once-profitable strategies have already lost their power
due to competition), or require expensive data to backtest (such as
historical fundamental data). Furthermore, many of these academic

                                                                                                9
10                                                           QUANTITATIVE TRADING

TABLE 2.1 Sources of Trading Ideas         URL

Type                                       www.hbs.edu/research/research
                                              .html
Academic
Business schools' finance professors' web  www.ssrn.com
                                           www.nber.org
   sites                                   www.ieor.columbia.edu/seminars/
Social Science Research Network
National Bureau of Economic Research          financialengineering
Business schools' quantitative finance     www.nytimes.com

   seminars                                www.economist.com
Mark Hulbert's column in the New York
                                           finance.yahoo.com
   Times' Sunday business section          www.TradingMarkets.com
Buttonwood column in the Economist         www.SeekingAlpha.com
                                           www.TheStreet.com
   magazine's finance section              www.TheKirkReport.com
                                           www.aleablog.com
Financial web sites and blogs              www.AbnormalReturns.com
Yahoo! Finance                             www.brettsteenbarger.com
TradingMarkets                             epchan.blogspot.com
Seeking Alpha
TheStreet.com                              www.Elitetrader.com
The Kirk Report                            www.wealth-lab.com
Alea Blog
Abnormal Returns                           www.sfomag.com
Brett Steenbarger Trading Psychology
My own!

Trader forums
Elite Trader
Wealth-Lab

Newspaper and magazines
Stocks, Futures and Options magazine

strategies work only on small-cap stocks, whose illiquidity may ren-
der actual trading profits far less impressive than their backtests
would suggest.

    This is not to say that you will not find some gems if you are
persistent enough, but I have found that many traders' forums or
blogs may suggest simpler strategies that are equally profitable. You
might be skeptical that people would actually post truly profitable
strategies in the public space for all to see. After all, doesn't this
disclosure increase the competition and decrease the profitability
of the strategy? And you would be right: Most ready-made strategies
that you may find in these places actually do not withstand careful
Fishing for Ideas  11

backtesting. Just like the academic studies, the strategies from
traders' forums may have worked only for a little while, or they
work for only a certain class of stocks, or they work only if you
don't factor in transaction costs. However, the trick is that you
can often modify the basic strategy and make it profitable. (Many
of these caveats as well as a few common variations on a basic
strategy will be examined in detail in Chapter 3.)

    For example, someone once suggested a strategy to me that was
described in Wealth-Lab (see Table 2.1), where it was claimed that it
had a high Sharpe ratio. When I backtested the strategy, it turned out
not to work as well as advertised. I then tried a few simple modifica-
tions, such as decreasing the holding period and entering and exiting
at different times than suggested, and was able to turn this strategy
into one of my main profit centers. If you are diligent and creative
enough to try the multiple variations of a basic strategy, chances are
you will find one of those variations that is highly profitable.

    When I left the institutional money management industry to
trade on my own, I worried that I would be cut off from the flow
of trading ideas from my colleagues and mentors. But then I found
out that one of the best ways to gather and share trading ideas is
to start your own trading blog--for every trading "secret" that you
divulge to the world, you will be rewarded with multiple ones from
your readers. (The person who suggested the Wealth-Lab strategy to
me was a reader who works 12 time zones away. If it weren't for my
blog, there was little chance that I would have met him and bene-
fited from his suggestion.) In fact, what you thought of as secrets
are more often than not well-known ideas to many others! What
truly make a strategy proprietary and its secrets worth protecting
are the tricks and variations that you have come up with, not the
plain vanilla version.

    Furthermore, your bad ideas will quickly get shot down by your
online commentators, thus potentially saving you from major losses.
After I glowingly described a seasonal stock-trading strategy on
my blog that was developed by some finance professors, a reader
promptly went ahead and backtested that strategy and reported that
it didn't work. (See my blog entry, "Seasonal Trades in Stocks,"
at epchan.blogspot.com/2007/11/seasonal-trades-in-stocks.html and
12  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

the reader's comment therein. This strategy is described in more de-
tail in Example 7.6.) Of course, I would not have traded this strategy
without backtesting it on my own anyway, and indeed, my subse-
quent backtest confirmed his findings. But the fact that my reader
found significant flaws with the strategy is important confirmation
that my own backtest is not erroneous.

    All in all, I have found that it is actually easier to gather and
exchange trading ideas as an independent trader than when I was
working in the secretive hedge fund world in New York. (When I
worked at Millennium Partners--a multibillion-dollar hedge fund on
Fifth Avenue--one trader ripped a published paper out of the hands
of his programmer, who happened to have picked it up from the
trader's desk. He was afraid the programmer might learn his "se-
crets.") That may be because people are less wary of letting you
know their secrets when they think you won't be obliterating their
profits by allocating $100 million to that strategy.

    No, the difficulty is not the lack of ideas. The difficulty is to de-
velop a taste for which strategy is suitable for your personal circum-
stances and goals, and which ones look viable even before you de-
vote the time to diligently backtest them. This taste for prospective
strategies is what I will try to convey in this chapter.

HOW TO IDENTIFY A STRATEGY THAT
SUITS YOU

Whether a strategy is viable often does not have anything to do with
the strategy itself--it has to do with you. Here are some considera-
tions.

Your Working Hours

Do you trade only part time? If so, you would probably want to con-
sider only strategies that hold overnight and not the intraday strate-
gies. Otherwise, you may have to fully automate your strategies (see
Chapter 5 on execution) so that they can run on autopilot most of
the time and alert you only when problems occur.
Fishing for Ideas  13

    When I was working full time for others and trading part time
for myself, I traded a simple strategy in my personal account that
required entering or adjusting limit orders on a few exchange-traded
funds (ETFs) once a day, before the market opened. Then, when I
first became independent, my level of automation was still relatively
low, so I considered only strategies that require entering orders once
before the market opens and once before the close. Later on, I added
a program that can automatically scan real-time market data and
transmit orders to my brokerage account throughout the trading day
when certain conditions are met. So trading remains a "part-time"
pursuit for me, which is partly why I want to trade quantitatively in
the first place.

Your Programming Skills

Are you good at programming? If you know some programming
languages such as Visual Basic or even Java, C#, or C++, you can
explore high-frequency strategies, and you can also trade a large
number of securities. Otherwise, settle for strategies that trade only
once a day, or trade just a few stocks, futures, or currencies. (This
constraint may be overcome if you don't mind the expense of hiring
a software contractor. Again, see Chapter 5 for more details.)

Your Trading Capital

Do you have a lot of capital for trading as well as expenditure on
infrastructure and operation? In general, I would not recommend
quantitative trading for an account with less than $50,000 capi-
tal. Let's say the dividing line between a high- versus low-capital
account is $100,000. Capital availability affects many choices; the
first is whether you should open a retail brokerage account or a
proprietary trading account (more on this in Chapter 4 on setting
up your business). For now, I will consider this constraint with
strategy choices in mind.

    With a low-capital account, we need to find strategies that can
utilize the maximum leverage available. (Of course, getting a higher
leverage is beneficial only if you have a consistently profitable
14  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

strategy.) Trading futures, currencies, and options can offer you
higher leverage than stocks; intraday positions allow a Regulation
T leverage of 4, while interday (overnight) positions allow only a
leverage of 2, requiring double the amount of capital for a portfo-
lio of the same size. Finally, capital (or leverage) availability de-
termines whether you should focus on directional trades (long or
short only) or dollar-neutral trades (hedged or pair trades). A dollar-
neutral portfolio (meaning the market value of the long positions
equals the market value of the short positions) or market-neutral
portfolio (meaning the beta of the portfolio with respect to a mar-
ket index is close to zero, where beta measures the ratio between
the expected returns of the portfolio and the expected returns of
the market index) require twice the capital or leverage of a long- or
short-only portfolio. So even though a hedged position is less risky
than an unhedged position, the returns generated are correspond-
ingly smaller and may not meet your personal requirements.

    Capital availability also imposes a number of indirect con-
straints. It affects how much you can spend on various infrastruc-
ture, data, and software. For example, if you have low trading capi-
tal, your online brokerage will not be likely to supply you with real-
time market data for too many stocks, so you can't really have a
strategy that requires real-time market data over a large universe of
stocks. (You can, of course, subscribe to a third-party market data
vendor, but then the extra cost may not be justifiable if your trad-
ing capital is low.) Similarly, clean historical stock data with high
frequency costs more than historical daily stock data, so a high-
frequency stock-trading strategy may not be feasible with small cap-
ital expenditure. For historical stock data, there is another quality
that may be even more important than their frequencies: whether
the data are free of survivorship bias. I will define survivorship bias
in the following section. Here, we just need to know that historical
stock data without survivorship bias are much more expensive than
those that have such a bias. Yet if your data have survivorship bias,
the backtest result can be unreliable.

    The same consideration applies to news--whether you can af-
ford a high-coverage, real-time news source such as Bloomberg de-
termines whether a news-driven strategy is a viable one. Same for
Fishing for Ideas                                             15

fundamental (i.e., companies' financial) data--whether you can af-
ford a good historical database with fundamental data on companies
determines whether you can build a strategy that relies on such data.

    Table 2.2 lists how capital (whether for trading or expenditure)
constraint can influence your many choices.

    This table is, of course, not a set of hard-and-fast rules, just some
issues to consider. For example, if you have low capital but opened
an account at a proprietary trading firm, then you will be free of
many of the considerations above (though not expenditure on in-
frastructure). I started my life as an independent quantitative trader
with $100,000 at a retail brokerage account (I chose Interactive Bro-
kers), and I traded only directional, intraday stock strategies at first.
But when I developed a strategy that sometimes requires much more
leverage in order to be profitable, I signed up as a member of a pro-
prietary trading firm as well. (Yes, you can have both, or more, ac-
counts simultaneously. In fact, there are good reasons to do so if
only for the sake of comparing their execution speeds and access to
liquidity. See "Choosing a Brokerage or Proprietary Trading Firm"
in Chapter 4.)

    Despite my frequent admonitions here and elsewhere to beware
of historical data with survivorship bias, when I first started I down-
loaded only the split-and-dividend-adjusted Yahoo! Finance data

TABLE 2.2 How Capital Availability Affects Your Many Choices

Low Capital                              High Capital

Proprietary trading firm's membership    Retail brokerage account
Futures, currencies, options             Everything, including stocks
Intraday                                 Both intra- and interday (overnight)
Directional                              Directional or market neutral
Small stock universe for intraday        Large stock universe for intraday

   trading                                  trading
Daily historical data with survivorship  High-frequency historical data,

   bias                                     survivorship biasｭfree
Low-coverage or delayed news source      High-coverage, real-time news source
No historical news database              Survivorship biasｭfree historical news

No historical fundamental data on           database
   stocks                                Survivorship biasｭfree historical

                                            fundamental data on stocks
16  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

using the download program from HQuotes.com (more on the dif-
ferent databases and tools in Chapter 3). This database is not sur-
vivorship biasｭfree--but more than two years later, I am still using
it for most of my backtesting! In fact, a trader I know, who each
day trades more than 10 times my account size, typically uses such
biased data for his backtesting, and yet his strategies are still prof-
itable. How can this be possible? Probably because these are intra-
day strategies. It seems that the only people I know who are willing
and able to afford survivorship biasｭfree data are those who work in
money management firms trading tens of millions of dollars or more
(that includes my former self). So, you see, as long as you are aware
of the limitations of your tools and data, you can cut many corners
and still succeed.

    Though futures afford you high leverage, some futures contracts
have such a large size that it would still be impossible for a small ac-
count to trade. For instance, though the platinum future contract on
the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) has a margin require-
ment of only $8,100, its nominal value is currently about $100,000.
Furthermore, its volatility is such that a 6 percent daily move is
not too rare, which translates to a $6,000 daily profit-and-loss (P&L)
swing in your account due to just this one contract. (Believe me,
I used to have a few of these contracts in my account, and it is a
sickening feeling when they move against you.) In contrast, ES, the
E-mini S&P 500 future on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME,
soon to be merged with NYMEX), has a nominal value of about
$67,500, and a 6 percent or larger daily move happened only twice in
the last 15 years. That's why its margin requirement is $4,500, only
55 percent that of the platinum contract.

Your Goal

Most people who choose to become traders want to earn a steady
(hopefully increasing) monthly, or at least quarterly, income. But
you may be independently wealthy, and long-term capital gain is all
that matters to you. The strategies to pursue for short-term income
versus long-term capital gain are distinguished mainly by their hold-
ing periods. Obviously, if you hold a stock for an average of one
Fishing for Ideas  17

year, you won't be generating much monthly income (unless you
started trading a while ago and have launched a new subportfolio
every month, which you proceed to hold for a year--that is, you
stagger your portfolios.) More subtly, even if your strategy holds a
stock only for a month on average, your month-to-month profit fluc-
tuation is likely to be fairly large (unless you hold hundreds of dif-
ferent stocks in your portfolio, which can be a result of staggering
your portfolios), and therefore you cannot count on generating in-
come on a monthly basis. This relationship between holding period
(or, conversely, the trading frequency) and consistency of returns
(that is, the Sharpe ratio or, conversely, the drawdown) will be dis-
cussed further in the following section. The upshot here is that the
more regularly you want to realize profits and generate income, the
shorter your holding period should be.

    There is a misconception aired by some investment advisers,
though, that if your goal is to achieve maximum long-term capital
growth, then the best strategy is a buy-and-hold one. This notion
has been shown to be mathematically false. In reality, maximum
long-term growth is achieved by finding a strategy with the maxi-
mum Sharpe ratio (defined in the next section), provided that you
have access to sufficiently high leverage. Therefore, comparing a
short-term strategy with a very short holding period, small annual
return, but very high Sharpe ratio, to a long-term strategy with a
long holding period, high annual return, but lower Sharpe ratio, it is
still preferable to choose the short-term strategy even if your goal is
long-term growth, barring tax considerations and the limitation on
your margin borrowing (more on this surprising fact later in Chapter
6 on money and risk management).

A TASTE FOR PLAUSIBLE STRATEGIES
AND THEIR PITFALLS

Now, let's suppose that you have read about several potential strate-
gies that fit your personal requirements. Presumably, someone else
has done backtests on these strategies and reported that they have
great historical returns. Before proceeding to devote your time to
18                       QUANTITATIVE TRADING

performing a comprehensive backtest on this strategy (not to men-
tion devoting your capital to actually trading this strategy), there
are a number of quick checks you can do to make sure you won't be
wasting your time or money.

How Does It Compare with a Benchmark and
How Consistent Are Its Returns?

This point seems obvious when the strategy in question is a stock-
trading strategy that buys (but not shorts) stocks. Everybody seems
to know that if a long-only strategy returns 10 percent a year, it is
not too fantastic because investing in an index fund will generate as
much, if not better, return on average. However, if the strategy is a
long-short dollar-neutral strategy (i.e., the portfolio holds long and
short positions with equal capital), then 10 percent is quite a good
return, because then the benchmark of comparison is not the market
index, but a riskless asset such as the yield of the three-month U.S.
Treasury bill (which at the time of this writing is about 4 percent).

    Another issue to consider is the consistency of the returns gen-
erated by a strategy. Though a strategy may have the same average
return as the benchmark, perhaps it delivered positive returns every
month while the benchmark occasionally suffered some very bad
months. In this case, we would still deem the strategy superior. This
leads us to consider the information ratio or Sharpe ratio (Sharpe,
1994), rather than returns, as the proper performance measurement
of a quantitative trading strategy.

    Information ratio is the measure to use when you want to assess
a long-only strategy. It is defined as

    Information Ratio =  Average of Excess Returns

                         Standard Deviation of Excess Returns

where

    Excess Returns = Portfolio Returns - Benchmark Returns

    Now the benchmark is usually the market index to which the
securities you are trading belong. For example, if you trade only
Fishing for Ideas  19

small-cap stocks, the market index should be the Standard & Poor's
small-cap index or the Russell 2000 index, rather than the S&P 500.
If you are trading just gold futures, then the market index should be
gold spot price, rather than a stock index.

    The Sharpe ratio is actually a special case of the information
ratio, suitable when we have a dollar-neutral strategy, so that the
benchmark to use is always the risk-free rate. In practice, most
traders use the Sharpe ratio even when they are trading a directional
(long or short only) strategy, simply because it facilitates compar-
ison across different strategies. Everyone agrees on what the risk-
free rate is, but each trader can use a different market index to come
up with their own favorite information ratio, rendering comparison
difficult.

    (Actually, there are some subtleties in calculating the Sharpe ra-
tio related to whether and how to subtract the risk-free rate, how to
annualize your Sharpe ratio for ease of comparison, and so on. I will
cover these subtleties in the next chapter, which will also contain
an example on how to compute the Sharpe ratio for a dollar-neutral
and a long-only strategy.)

    If the Sharpe ratio is such a nice performance measure across
different strategies, you may wonder why it is not quoted more of-
ten instead of returns. In fact, when a colleague and I went to SAC
Capital Advisors (assets under management: $14 billion) to pitch a
strategy, their then head of risk management said to us: "Well, a high
Sharpe ratio is certainly nice, but if you can get a higher return in-
stead, we can all go buy bigger houses with our bonuses!" This rea-
soning is quite wrong: A higher Sharpe ratio will actually allow you
to make more profits in the end, since it allows you to trade at a
higher leverage. It is the leveraged return that matters in the end,
not the nominal return of a trading strategy. For more on this, see
Chapter 6 on money and risk management.

    (And no, our pitching to SAC was not successful, but for rea-
sons quite unrelated to the returns of the strategy. In any case,
at that time neither my colleague nor I were familiar enough with
the mathematical connection between the Sharpe ratio and lever-
aged returns to make a proper counterargument to that head of risk
management.)
20                                               QUANTITATIVE TRADING

    Now that you know what a Sharpe ratio is, you may want to
find out what kind of Sharpe ratio your candidate strategies have.
Often, they are not reported by the authors of that strategy, and you
will have to e-mail them in private for this detail. And often, they
will oblige, especially if the authors are finance professors; but if
they refuse, you have no choice but to perform the backtest yourself.
Sometimes, however, you can still make an educated guess based on
the flimsiest of information:

r If a strategy trades only a few times a year, chances are its
  Sharpe ratio won't be high. This does not prevent it from being
  part of your multistrategy trading business, but it does disqualify
  the strategy from being your main profit center.

r If a strategy has deep (e.g., more than 10 percent) or lengthy
  (e.g., four or more months) drawdowns, it is unlikely that it will
  have a high Sharpe ratio. I will explain the concept of drawdown
  in the next section, but you can just visually inspect the equity
  curve (which is also the cumulative profit-and-loss curve, assum-
  ing no redemption or cash infusion) to see if it is very bumpy
  or not. Any peak-to-trough of that curve is a drawdown. (See
  Figure 2.1 for an example.)

                              Maximum
                              drawdown duration

                                                 A drawdown

    Equity in $  3x104

                 2x104        Maximum
                 1x104        drawdown

    2000                2001            2002     2003 Time

FIGURE 2.1 Drawdown, Maximum Drawdown, and Maximum Drawdown
Duration
Fishing for Ideas  21

    As a rule of thumb, any strategy that has a Sharpe ratio of less
than 1 is not suitable as a stand-alone strategy. For a strategy that
achieves profitability almost every month, its (annualized) Sharpe
ratio is typically greater than 2. For a strategy that is profitable al-
most every day, its Sharpe ratio is usually greater than 3. I will show
you how to calculate Sharpe ratios for various strategies in Exam-
ples 3.4, 3.6, and 3.7 in the next chapter.

How Deep and Long Is the Drawdown?

A strategy suffers a drawdown whenever it has lost money recently.
A drawdown at a given time t is defined as the difference between
the current equity value (assuming no redemption or cash infusion)
of the portfolio and the global maximum of the equity curve occur-
ring on or before time t. The maximum drawdown is the difference
between the global maximum of the equity curve with the global
minimum of the curve after the occurrence of the global maximum
(time order matters here: The global minimum must occur later
than the global maximum). The global maximum is called the "high
watermark." The maximum drawdown duration is the longest it
has taken for the equity curve to recover losses.

    More often, drawdowns are measured in percentage terms, with
the denominator being the equity at the high watermark, and the nu-
merator being the loss of equity since reaching the high watermark.

    Figure 2.1 illustrates a typical drawdown, the maximum draw-
down, and the maximum drawdown duration of an equity curve.
I will include a tutorial in Example 3.5 on how to compute these
quantities from a table of daily profits and losses using either Excel
or MATLAB. One thing to keep in mind: The maximum drawdown
and the maximum drawdown duration do not typically overlap over
the same period.

    Defined mathematically, drawdown seems abstract and remote.
However, in real life there is nothing more gut-wrenching and
emotionally disturbing to suffer than a drawdown if you're a trader.
(This is as true for independent traders as for institutional ones.
When an institutional trading group is suffering a drawdown, every-
body seems to feel that life has lost meaning and spend their days
22  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

dreading the eventual shutdown of the strategy or maybe even the
group as a whole.) It is therefore something we would want to mini-
mize. You have to ask yourself, realistically, how deep and how long
a drawdown will you be able to tolerate and not liquidate your port-
folio and shut down your strategy? Would it be 20 percent and three
months, or 10 percent and one month? Comparing your tolerance
with the numbers obtained from the backtest of a candidate strat-
egy determines whether that strategy is for you.

    Even if the author of the strategy you read about did not pub-
lish the precise numbers for drawdowns, you should still be able to
make an estimate from a graph of its equity curve. For example, in
Figure 2.1, you can see that the longest drawdown goes from around
February 2001 to around October 2002. So the maximum drawdown
duration is about 20 months. Also, at the beginning of the maximum
drawdown, the equity was about $2.3 ﾗ 104, and at the end, about
$0.5 ﾗ 104. So the maximum drawdown is about $1.8 ﾗ 104.

How Will Transaction Costs Affect the Strategy?

Every time a strategy buys and sells a security, it incurs a trans-
action cost. The more frequent it trades, the larger the impact of
transaction costs will be on the profitability of the strategy. These
transaction costs are not just due to commission fees charged by
the broker. There will also be the cost of liquidity--when you buy
and sell securities at their market prices, you are paying the bid-ask
spread. If you buy and sell securities using limit orders, however,
you avoid the liquidity costs but incur opportunity costs. This is be-
cause your limit orders may not be executed, and therefore you may
miss out on the potential profits of your trade. Also, when you buy
or sell a large chunk of securities, you will not be able to complete
the transaction without impacting the prices at which this transac-
tion is done. (Sometimes just displaying a bid to buy a large number
of shares for a stock can move the prices higher without your having
bought a single share yet!) This effect on the market prices due to
your own order is called market impact, and it can contribute to a
large part of the total transaction cost when the security is not very
liquid.
Fishing for Ideas  23

    Finally, there can be a delay between the time your program
transmits an order to your brokerage and the time it is executed
at the exchange, due to delays on the Internet or various software-
related issues. This delay can cause a "slippage," the difference be-
tween the price that triggers the order and the execution price. Of
course, this slippage can be of either sign, but on average it will be
a cost rather than a gain to the trader. (If you find that it is a gain on
average, you should change your program to deliberately delay the
transmission of the order by a few seconds!)

    Transaction costs vary widely for different kinds of securities.
You can typically estimate it by taking half the average bid-ask
spread of a security and then adding the commission if your or-
der size is not much bigger than the average sizes of the best bid
and offer. If you are trading S&P 500 stocks, for example, the aver-
age transaction cost (excluding commissions, which depend on your
brokerage) would be about 5 basis points (that is, five-hundredths of
a percent). Note that I count a round-trip transaction of a buy and
then a sell as two transactions--hence, a round trip will cost 10 ba-
sis points in this example. If you are trading ES, the E-mini S&P 500
futures, the transaction cost will be about 1 basis point. Sometimes
the authors whose strategies you read about will disclose that they
have included transaction costs in their backtest performance, but
more often they will not. If they haven't, then you just to have to
assume that the results are before transactions, and apply your own
judgment to its validity.

    As an example of the impact of transaction costs on a strategy,
consider this simple mean-reverting strategy on ES. It is based on
Bollinger bands: that is, every time the price exceeds plus or minus
2 moving standard deviations of its moving average, short or buy, re-
spectively. Exit the position when the price reverts back to within 1
moving standard deviation of the moving average. If you allow your-
self to enter and exit every five minutes, you will find that the Sharpe
ratio is about 3 without transaction costs--very excellent indeed!
Unfortunately, the Sharpe ratio is reduced to ｭ3 if we subtract 1 ba-
sis point as transaction costs, making it a very unprofitable strategy.

    For another example of the impact of transaction costs, see
Example 3.7.
24  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

Does the Data Suffer from Survivorship Bias?

A historical database of stock prices that does not include stocks
that have disappeared due to bankruptcies, delistings, mergers, or
acquisitions suffer from the so-called survivorship bias, because
only "survivors" of those often unpleasant events remain in the
database. (The same term can be applied to mutual fund or hedge
fund databases that do not include funds that went out of business.)
Backtesting a strategy using data with survivorship bias can be dan-
gerous because it may inflate the historical performance of the strat-
egy. This is especially true if the strategy has a "value" bent; that is,
it tends to buy stocks that are cheap. Some stocks were cheap be-
cause the companies were going bankrupt shortly. So if your strat-
egy includes only those cases when the stocks were very cheap
but eventually survived (and maybe prospered) and neglects those
cases where the stocks finally did get delisted, the backtest perfor-
mance will, of course, be much better than what a trader would ac-
tually have suffered at that time.

    So when you read about a "buy on the cheap" strategy that has
great performance, ask the author of that strategy whether it was
tested on survivorship biasｭfree (sometimes called "point-in-time")
data. If not, be skeptical of its results. (A toy strategy that illustrates
this can be found in Example 3.3.)

How Did the Performance of the Strategy
Change over the Years?

Most strategies performed much better 10 years ago than now, at
least in a backtest. There weren't as many hedge funds running
quantitative strategies then. Also, bid-ask spreads were much wider
then: So if you assumed the transaction cost today was applicable
throughout the backtest, the earlier period would have unrealisti-
cally high returns.

    Survivorship bias in the data might also contribute to the good
performance in the early period. The reason that survivorship bias
mainly inflates the performance of an earlier period is that the fur-
ther back we go in our backtest, the more missing stocks we will
Fishing for Ideas  25

have. Since some of those stocks are missing because they went
out of business, a long-only strategy would have looked better in
the early period of the backtest than what the actual profit and loss
(P&L) would have been at that time. Therefore, when judging the
suitability of a strategy, one must pay particular attention to its per-
formance in the most recent few years, and not be fooled by the
overall performance, which inevitably includes some rosy numbers
back in the old days.

    Finally, "regime shifts" in the financial markets can mean that
financial data from an earlier period simply cannot be fitted to the
same model that is applicable today. Major regime shifts can oc-
cur because of changes in securities market regulation (such as
decimalization of stock prices or the elimination of the short-sale
rule, which I allude to in Chapter 5) or other macroeconomic events
(such as the subprime mortgage meltdown).

    This point may be hard to swallow for many statistically minded
readers. Many of them may think that the more data there is, the
more statistically robust the backtest should be. This is true only
when the financial time series is generated by a stationary process.
Unfortunately, financial time series is famously nonstationary, due
to all of the reasons given earlier.

    It is possible to incorporate such regime shifts into a sophisti-
cated "super"-model (as I will discuss in Example 7.1), but it is much
simpler if we just demand that our model deliver good performance
on recent data.

Does the Strategy Suffer from
Data-Snooping Bias?

If you build a trading strategy that has 100 parameters, it is very
likely that you can optimize those parameters in such a way that
the historical performance will look fantastic. It is also very likely
that the future performance of this strategy will look nothing like
its historical performance and will turn out to be very poor. By hav-
ing so many parameters, you are probably fitting the model to his-
torical accidents in the past that will not repeat themselves in the
26  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

future. Actually, this so-called data-snooping bias is very hard to
avoid even if you have just one or two parameters (such as entry and
exit thresholds), and I will leave the discussion on how to minimize
its impact to Chapter 3. But, in general, the more rules the strategy
has, and the more parameters the model has, the more likely it is go-
ing to suffer data-snooping bias. Simple models are often the ones
that will stand the test of time. (See the sidebar on my views on
artificial intelligence and stock picking.)

  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND STOCK
  PICKING*

There was an article in the New York Times a short while ago about a new hedge
fund launched by Mr. Ray Kurzweil, a pioneer in the field of artificial intelligence.
(Thanks to my fellow blogger, Yaser Anwar, who pointed it out to me.) According
to Kurzweil, the stock-picking decisions in this fund are supposed to be made
by machines that ". . . can observe billions of market transactions to see patterns
we could never see" (quoted in Duhigg, 2006).

      While I am certainly a believer in algorithmic trading, I have become a skep-
tic when it comes to trading based on "artificial intelligence."

      At the risk of oversimplification, we can characterize artificial intelligence
(AI) as trying to fit past data points into a function with many, many param-
eters. This is the case for some of the favorite tools of AI: neural networks,
decision trees, and genetic algorithms. With many parameters, we can for sure
capture small patterns that no human can see. But do these patterns persist?
Or are they random noises that will never replay again? Experts in AI assure
us that they have many safeguards against fitting the function to transient
noise. And indeed, such tools have been very effective in consumer market-
ing and credit card fraud detection. Apparently, the patterns of consumers and
thefts are quite consistent over time, allowing such AI algorithms to work even
with a large number of parameters. However, from my experience, these safe-
guards work far less well in financial markets prediction, and overfitting to
the noise in historical data remains a rampant problem. As a matter of fact,
I have built financial predictive models based on many of these AI algorithms in
the past. Every time a carefully constructed model that seems to work marvels
in backtest came up, they inevitably performed miserably going forward. The
main reason for this seems to be that the amount of statistically independent
financial data is far more limited compared to the billions of independent con-
sumer and credit transactions available. (You may think that there is a lot of tick-
by-tick financial data to mine, but such data is serially correlated and far from
independent.)
Fishing for Ideas  27

      This is not to say that no methods based on AI will work in prediction. The
ones that work for me are usually characterized by these properties:

   r They are based on a sound econometric or rational basis, and not on ran-

      dom discovery of patterns.

   r They have few parameters that need to be fitted to past data.
   r They involve linear regression only, and not fitting to some esoteric non-

      linear functions.

   r They are conceptually simple.
   r All optimizations must occur in a lookback moving window, involving no fu-

      ture unseen data. And the effect of this optimization must be continuously
      demonstrated using this future, unseen data.

      Only when a trading model is constrained in such a manner do I dare to
allow testing on my small, precious amount of historical data. Apparently, Oc-
cam's razor works not only in science, but in finance as well.

*This section was adapted from my blog article "Artificial Intelligence and Stock Pick-
ing," which you can find at epchan.blogspot.com/2006/12/artificial-intelligence-and-
stock.html.

Does the Strategy "Fly under the Radar"
of Institutional Money Managers?

Since this book is about starting a quantitative trading business from
scratch, and not about starting a hedge fund that manages multiple
millions of dollars, we should not be concerned whether a strategy
is one that can absorb multiple millions of dollars. (Capacity is the
technical term for how much a strategy can absorb without nega-
tively impacting its returns.) In fact, quite the opposite--you should
look for those strategies that fly under the radar of most institutional
investors, for example, strategies that have very low capacities be-
cause they trade too often, strategies that trade very few stocks ev-
ery day, or strategies that have very infrequent positions (such as
some seasonal trades in commodity futures described in Chapter 7).
Those niches are the ones that are likely still to be profitable because
they have not yet been completely arbitraged away by the gigantic
hedge funds.
28  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

SUMMARY

Finding prospective quantitative trading strategies is not difficult.
There are:

  r Business school and other economic research web sites.
  r Financial web sites and blogs focusing on the retail investors.
  r Trader forums where you can exchange ideas with fellow

    traders.

    After you have done a sufficient amount of Net surfing or trading
magazine riffling, you will find a number of promising trading strate-
gies. Whittle them down to just a handful based on your personal
circumstances and requirements, and by applying the screening cri-
teria (more accurately described as healthy skepticism) that I listed
earlier:

  r How much time do you have for baby-sitting your trading pro-
    grams?

  r How good a programmer are you?
  r How much capital do you have?
  r Is your goal to earn steady monthly income or to strive for a

    large, long-term capital gain?

    Even before doing an in-depth backtest of the strategy, you can
quickly filter out some unsuitable strategies if they fail one or more
of these tests:

  r Does it outperform a benchmark?
  r Does it have a high enough Sharpe ratio?
  r Does it have a small enough drawdown and short enough draw-

    down duration?
  r Does the backtest suffer from survivorship bias?
  r Does the strategy lose steam in recent years compared to its ear-

    lier years?
Fishing for Ideas  29

r Does the strategy have its own "niche" that protects it from in-
  tense competition from large institutional money managers?

    After making all these quick judgments, you are now ready to
proceed to the next chapter, which is to rigorously backtest the
strategy yourself to make sure that it does what it is advertised
to do.
                                   CHAPTER 3

          Backtesting

A key difference between a traditional investment management pro-
cess and a quantitative investment process is the possibility of back-
testing a quantitative investment strategy to see how it would have
performed in the past. Even if you found a strategy described in
complete detail with all the historical performance data available,
you would still need to backtest it yourself. This exercise serves
several purposes. If nothing else, this replication of the research will
ensure that you have understood the strategy completely and have
reproduced it exactly for implementation as a trading system. Just
as in any medical or scientific research, replicating others' results
also ensures that the original research did not commit any of the
common errors plaguing this process. But more than just perform-
ing due diligence, doing the backtest yourself allows you to exper-
iment with variations of the original strategy, thereby refining and
improving the strategy.

    In this chapter, I will describe the common platforms that can
be used for backtesting, various sources of historical data useful for
backtesting, a minimal set of standard performance measures that a
backtest should provide, common pitfalls to avoid, and simple re-
finements and improvements to strategies. A few fully developed
backtesting examples will also be presented to illustrate the prin-
ciples and techniques described.

                                                                                              31
32  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

COMMON BACKTESTING PLATFORMS

There are numerous commercial platforms that are designed for
backtesting, some of them costing tens of thousands of dollars. In
keeping with the focus on start-ups in this book, I start with those
with which I am familiar and that can be purchased economically
and are widely used.

Excel

This is the most basic and most common tool for traders, whether
retail or institutional. You can enhance its power further if you can
write Visual Basic macros. The beauty of Excel is "What you see
is what you get" (or WYSIWYG in computing parlance). Data and
program are all in one place so that nothing is hidden. Also, a com-
mon backtesting pitfall called "look-ahead bias," which will be ex-
plained later, is unlikely to occur in Excel (unless you use macros,
which renders it no longer WYSIWYG) because you can easily align
the dates with the various data columns and signals on a spread-
sheet. Another advantage of Excel is that often backtesting and live
trade generation can be done from the same spreadsheet, eliminat-
ing any duplication of programming efforts. The major disadvantage
of Excel is that it can be used to backtest only fairly simple models.
But, as I explained in the previous chapter, simple models are often
the best!

MATLAB

MATLAB R (www.mathworks.com) is one of the most common
backtesting platforms used by quantitative analysts and traders in
large institutions. It is ideal for testing strategies that involve a
large portfolio of stocks. (Imagine backtesting a strategy involving
1,500 symbols on Excel--it is possible, but quite painful.). It has nu-
merous advanced statistical and mathematical modules built in, so
traders do not have to reinvent the wheel if their trading algorithms
involve some sophisticated but common mathematical concepts.
Backtesting                             33

(A good example is principal component analysis--often used in
factor models in statistical arbitrage trading, and a hassle to im-
plement in other programming languages. See Example 7.4.) There
is also a large number of third-party freeware available for down-
load from the Internet, many of them very useful for quantitative
trading purposes (an example is the cointegration package used in
Example 7.2). Finally, MATLAB is very useful in retrieving web
pages with financial information and parsing it into a useful form
(so-called web scraping). Example 3.1 shows how this can be done.

    Despite the seeming sophistication of the platform, it is actually
very easy to learn (at least for basic usage) and it is very quick to
write a complete backtest program using this language. The main
drawback of MATLAB is that it is relatively expensive: it costs over
$1,000 to acquire a license. However, there are several clones of
MATLAB on the market where you can write and use codes that
are very similar to MATLAB:

r O-Matrix (www.omatrix.com)
r Octave (www.gnu.org/software/octave)
r Scilab (www.scilab.org)

    These clones may cost only several hundred dollars, or may be
entirely free. Not surprisingly, the more expensive the clone is, the
more compatible it is with programs written in MATLAB. (Of course,
if you intend to write all the programs yourself and not use any third
party's codes, compatibility is not an issue. But then you would be
forfeiting one of the main benefits of using this language.) The other
drawback of MATLAB is that it is very useful for backtesting but
clumsy to use as an execution platform. So, often, you will need
to build a separate execution system in another language once you
have backtested your strategy. Despite these drawbacks, MATLAB
has found widespread use within the quantitative trading commu-
nity. I will include MATLAB codes for all the backtesting examples
in this book as well as provide a quick survey of the MATLAB lan-
guage itself in the appendix.
34  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

Example 3.1: Using MATLAB to Scrape Web Pages
for Financial Data

MATLAB is not only useful for numerical computations, but also for text
parsing. Following is an example of using MATLAB to retrieve a stock's
historical price information from Yahoo! Finance:

clear; % make sure previously defined variables are
%erased.

symbol=`IBM'; % the stock of interest
% retrieving a webpage
historicalPriceFile =...
urlread([`http://finance.yahoo.com/q/hp?s=', symbol]);

% extracting the date field to a cell array of cells
dateField=...
regexp(historicalPriceFile, ...
'<td class="yfnc tabledata1" nowrap align="right">...
([\d\w-]+)</td>', `tokens');

% extracting the numbers field to a cell array of cells
numField=regexp(historicalPriceFile, ...
'<td class="yfnc tabledata1" align="right">...
([\d\.,]+)</td>', `tokens');

% convert to cell array of strings
dates=[dateField{:}]';

% convert to cell array of strings
numField=[numField{:}]';

% convert to doubles array
op=str2double(numField (1:6:end)); % open
hi=str2double(numField (2:6:end)); % high
lo=str2double(numField (3:6:end)); % low
cl=str2double(numField (4:6:end)); % close
vol=str2double(numField (5:6:end)); % volume
adjCl=str2double(numField (6:6:end)); % adjusted close

This program file is available for download as epchan.com/book/
example3 1.m, with "sharperatio" as both username and password. There is
one limitation to this web-scraping script: It can retrieve only one web page
at a time. Because Yahoo! displays its historical data over many pages, it is
not really useful for retrieving the entire price history of IBM. Nevertheless,
it is a simple illustration of MATLAB's text processing functions.
Backtesting  35

TradeStation

TradeStation (www.tradestation.com) is familiar to many retail
traders as a brokerage that provides all-in-one backtesting and trade
execution platforms linked to the brokerage's servers. The main ad-
vantages of this setup are:

  r Most of the historical data necessary for backtesting is readily
    available, whereas you have to download the data from some-
    where else if you use Excel or MATLAB.

  r Once you have backtested the program, you can immediately
    generate orders using the same program and transmit them to
    the brokerage.

    The disadvantages of this approach are that once you have writ-
ten the software for your strategy, you are tied to TradeStation as
your broker, and the proprietary language used by TradeStation is
not as flexible as MATLAB and does not include some of the more
advanced statistical and mathematical functions some traders use.
Nevertheless, if you prefer the ease of use of an all-in-one system,
TradeStation may be a good choice.

    Since I have not used TradeStation in my own work, I will not
include backtesting examples in TradeStation.

High-End Backtesting Platforms

In case you do have the financial resources to purchase a high-end,
institutional-grade backtesting platform, here is a partial list:

  r FactSet's Alpha Testing (www.factset.com/products/directions/
    qim/alphatesting)

  r Clarifi's ModelStation (www.clarifi.com/ModelStation-Over-
    view.php)

  r Quantitative Analytics' MarketQA (www.qaisoftware.com)
  r Barra's Aegis System (www.mscibarra.com/products/analytics/

    aegis)
  r Logical Information Machines (www.lim.com)
  r Alphacet's Discovery (www.alphacet.com)
36  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

    Of all these, I have personal experience with only Logical In-
formation Machines and Alphacet Discovery. Logical Information
Machines is excellent for testing futures trading strategies, but it is
weaker for equities strategies, based on my experience 10 years ago.
Alphacet Discovery is a new product that integrates data retrieval,
backtesting, optimization with machine learning algorithms, and au-
tomated execution. It is quite powerful for backtesting and trading a
range of markets including futures, equities, and currencies. Exam-
ple 7.1 is a backtest example using the Discovery platform.

FINDING AND USING HISTORICAL
DATABASES

If you have a strategy in mind that requires a specific type of his-
torical data, the first thing to do is to Google that type of data. You
will be surprised how many free or low-cost historical databases
are available out there for many types of data. (For example, try
the search phrase "free historical intraday futures data.") Table 3.1
includes a number of the databases that I have found useful over
the years, most of them either free or very low cost. I have deliber-
ately left out the expensive databases from Bloomberg, Dow Jones,
FactSet, Thomson Reuters, or Tick Data. Though they have almost
every type of data imaginable for purchase, these data vendors cater
mostly to more established institutions and are typically not in the
price range of individuals or start-up institutions.

    While finding sources of data on the Internet is even easier than
finding prospective strategies, there are a number of issues and pit-
falls with many of these databases that I will discuss later in this sec-
tion. These issues apply mostly to stock and exchange-traded fund
(ETF) data only. Here are the most important ones.

Are the Data Split and Dividend Adjusted?

When a company had its stocks split N to 1 (N is usually 2, but
can be a fraction like 0.5 as well. When N is smaller than 1, it is
Backtesting                                                                 37

TABLE 3.1 Historical Databases for Backtesting

Source           Pros                                    Cons

                        Daily Stock Data

Finance.yahoo.com Free. Split/dividend adjusted.         Has survivorship bias.
                                                            Can download only
HQuotes.com      Low cost. Same data as                     one symbol at a
CSIdata.com         finance.yahoo.com. Software             time.
TrackData.com       enables download of multiple
CRSP.com            symbols.                             Has survivorship bias.
                                                            Split but not
                 Low cost. Source of Yahoo! and             dividend adjusted.
                    Google's historical data. Software
                    enables download of multiple         Has survivorship bias.
                    symbols.
                                                         Has survivorship bias.
                 Low cost. Split/dividend adjusted.
                    Software enables download of         Expensive. Updated
                    multiple symbols. Fundamental data      only once a month.
                    available.

                 Survivorship bias free.

                                Daily Futures Data

Quotes-plus.com  Low cost. Software enables download
CSIdata.com         of multiple symbols.

                 (See above.)
                                  Daily Forex Data

Oanda.com        Free.

                        Intraday Stock Data

HQuotes.com      (See above.)                            Short history for
                             Intraday Futures Data          intraday data.

DTN.com          Bid-ask data history available as part  Expensive: requires
                    of NxCore product.                      subscription to live
                                                            datafeed.
                               Intraday Forex Data

GainCapital.com Free. Long history.
38                         QUANTITATIVE TRADING

called a reverse split) with an ex-date of T, all the prices before T
need to be multiplied by 1/N. Similarly, when a company issued a
dividend $d per share with an ex-date of T, all the prices before T
need to be multiplied by the number (Close(T ｭ 1) ｭ d)/Close(T ｭ
1), where Close(T ｭ 1) is the closing price of the trading day before
T. Notice that I adjust the historical prices by a multiplier instead
of subtracting $d so that the historical daily returns will remain the
same pre- and postadjustment. This is the way Yahoo! Finance ad-
justs its historical data, and is the most common way. (If you adjust
by subtracting $d instead, the historical daily changes in prices will
be the same pre- and postadjustment, but not the daily returns.) If
the historical data are not adjusted, you will find a drop in price
at the ex-date's market open from previous day's close (apart from
normal market fluctuation), which may trigger an erroneous trading
signal.

    I recommend getting historical data that are already split and
dividend adjusted, because otherwise you would have to find a
separate historical database (such as earnings.com) of splits and
dividends and apply the adjustments yourself--a somewhat te-
dious and error-prone task, which I will describe in the following
example.

Example 3.2: Adjusting for Splits and Dividends

Here we look at IGE, an ETF that has had both splits and dividends in its
history. It had a 2:1 split on June 9, 2005 (the ex-date). Let's look at the
unadjusted prices around that date (you can download the historical prices
of IGE from Yahoo! Finance into an Excel spreadsheet):

Date       Open     High    Low                  Close

6/10/2005   73.98   74.08   73.31                 74
6/9/2005    72.45   73.74   72.23                 73.74
6/8/2005   144.13  146.44  143.75                144.48
6/7/2005   145     146.07  144.11                144.11
Backtesting                                                                                 39

    We need to adjust the prices prior to 6/9/2005 due to this split. This

is  easy:  N  =  2  here,  and  all  we  need  to  do  is  to  multiply  those  prices  by  1  .
                                                                                            2

The following table shows the adjusted prices:

Date                       Open          High                   Low             Close

6/10/2005                  73.98         74.08                 73.31            74
6/9/2005                   72.45         73.74                 72.23            73.74
6/8/2005                   72.065        73.22                 71.875           72.24
6/7/2005                   72.5          73.035                72.055           72.055

      Now, the astute reader will notice that the adjusted close prices here
do not match the adjusted close prices displayed in the Yahoo! Finance
table. The reason for this is that there have been dividends distributed af-
ter 6/9/2005, so the Yahoo! prices have been adjusted for all those as
well. Since each adjustment is a multiplier, the aggregate adjustment is
just the product of all the individual multipliers. Here are the dividends
from 6/9/2005 to November 2007, together with the unadjusted closing
prices of the previous trading days and the resulting individual multipliers:

Ex-Date                    Dividend                Prev Close                   Multiplier

9/26/2007                     0.177                   128.08                    0.998618
6/29/2007                     0.3                     119.44                    0.997488
12/21/2006                    0.322                   102.61                    0.996862
9/27/2006                     0.258                                             0.997181
6/23/2006                     0.32                      91.53                   0.996529
3/27/2006                     0.253                     92.2                    0.997331
12/23/2005                    0.236                     94.79                   0.997374
9/26/2005                     0.184                     89.87                   0.997933
6/21/2005                     0.217                     89                      0.997214
                                                        77.9

      (Check out the multipliers yourself on Excel using the formula I gave
above to see if they agree with my values here.) So the aggregate multi-
plier for the dividends is simply 0.998618 ﾗ 0.997488 ﾗ ｷ ｷ ｷ ﾗ 0.997214 =
0.976773. This multiplier should be applied to all the unadjusted prices
on or after 6/9/2005. The aggregate multiplier for the dividends and the
split is 0.976773 ﾗ 0.5 = 0.488386, which should be applied to all the
40                                         QUANTITATIVE TRADING

unadjusted prices before 6/9/2005. So let's look at the resulting adjusted
prices after applying these multipliers:

Date         Open           High      Low            Close

6/10/2005  72.26163      72.35931  71.6072         72.28117
6/9/2005   70.76717      72.02721  70.55228        72.02721
6/8/2005   70.39111      71.51929  70.20553        70.56205
6/7/2005   70.81601      71.33858  70.38135        70.38135

Now compare with the table from Yahoo! around November 1, 2007:

Date       Open High Low Close Volume Adj Close

6/10/2005 73.98   74.08   73.31     74     179300  72.28
6/9/2005 72.45    73.74   72.23     73.74  853200  72.03
6/8/2005 144.13  146.44  143.75    144.48  109600  70.56
6/7/2005 145     146.07  144.11    144.11  58000   70.38

      You can see that the adjusted closing prices from our calculations and
from Yahoo! are the same (after rounding to two decimal places). But, of
course, when you are reading this, IGE will likely have distributed more
dividends and may have even split further, so your Yahoo! table won't look
like the one above. It is a good exercise to check that you can make further
adjustments based on those dividends and splits that result in the same
adjusted prices as your current Yahoo! table.

Are the Data Survivorship Bias Free?

We already covered this issue in Chapter 2. Unfortunately, databases
that are free from survivorship bias are quite expensive and may
not be affordable for a start-up business. One way to overcome this
problem is to start collecting point-in-time data yourself for the ben-
efit of your future backtest. If you save the prices each day of all the
stocks in your universe to a file, then you will have a point-in-time
or survivorship-bias-free database to use in the future. Another way
to lessen the impact of survivorship bias is to backtest your strate-
gies on more recent data so that the results are not distorted by too
many missing stocks.
Example 3.3: An Example of How Survivorship Bias Can
Artificially Inflate a Strategy's Performance

Here is a toy "buy low-price stocks" strategy (Warning: This toy strategy is
hazardous to your financial health!). Let's say from a universe of the 1,000
largest stocks (based on market capitalization), we pick 10 that have the
lowest closing prices at the beginning of the year and hold them (with equal
initial capital) for one year. Let's look at what we would have picked if we
had a good, survivorship-bias-free database:

SYMBOL  Closing Price  Closing Price  Terminal Price
        on 1/2/2001    on 1/2/2002
ETYS                                          0.125
MDM          0.2188           NaN             0.49
INTW         0.3125           0.49            0.11
FDHG         0.4063           NaN             0.33
OGNC         0.5              NaN             0.2
MPLX         0.6875           NaN             0.8
GTS          0.7188           NaN             0.35
BUYX         0.75             NaN             0.17
PSIX         0.75             NaN             0.2188
             0.75             NaN

      All but MDM were delisted sometime between 1/2/2001 and 1/2/2002
(after all, the dot-com bubble was seriously bursting then!). The NaNs indi-
cate those with nonexistent closing prices on 1/2/2002. The Terminal Price
column indicates the last prices at which the stocks were traded on or before
1/2/2002. The total return on this portfolio in that year was ｭ42 percent.

      Now, let's look at what we would have picked if our database had sur-
vivorship bias and actually missed all those stocks that were delisted that
year. We would then have picked the following list instead:

SYMBOL Closing Price on 1/2/2001 Closing Price on 1/2/2002

MDM     0.3125                         0.49
ENGA    0.8438                         0.44
NEOF    0.875                         27.9
ENP     0.875                          0.05
MVL     0.9583                         2.5
URBN    1.0156                         3.0688
FNV     1.0625                         0.81
APT     1.125                          0.88
FLIR    1.2813                         9.475
RAZF    1.3438                         0.25

                                               41
42  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

      Notice that since we select only those stocks that "survived" until at
least 1/2/2002, they all have closing prices on that day. The total return on
this portfolio was 388 percent!

      In this example, ｭ42 percent was the actual return a trader would ex-
perience following this strategy, whereas 388 percent is a fictitious return
that was due to survivorship bias in our database.

Does Your Strategy Use High and Low Data?

For almost all daily stock data, the high and low prices are far noisier
than the open and close prices. What this means is that even when
you had placed a buy limit order below the recorded high of a day, it
might not have been filled, and vice versa for a sell limit order. (This
could be due to the fact that a very small order was transacted at the
high, or the execution could have occurred on a market to which
your order was not routed. Sometimes, the high or low is simply
due to an incorrectly reported tick that was not filtered out.) Hence,
a backtest that relies on high and low data is less reliable than one
that relies on the open and close.

    Actually, sometimes even a market on open (MOO) or market
on close (MOC) order might not be filled at the historical open
and close prices shown in your data. This is due to the fact that
the historical prices shown may be due to the primary exchange
(e.g., New York Stock Exchange [NYSE]), or it may be a composite
price including all the regional exchanges. Depending on where your
order was routed, it may be filled at a different price from the his-
torical opening or closing price shown in your dataset. Neverthe-
less, the discrepancies of the open and close prices usually have
less impact on backtest performance than the errors in the high
and low prices, since the latter almost always inflate your backtest
returns.

    After retrieving the data from a database, it is often advisable to
do a quick error check. The simplest way to do this is to calculate
the daily returns based on the data. If you have open, high, low, and
close prices, you can calculate the various combinations of daily
returns such as from the previous high to today's close as well. You
Backtesting  43

can then examine closely those days with returns that are, say, 4
standard deviations away from the average. Typically, an extreme
return should be accompanied by a news announcement, or should
occur on a day when the market index also experienced extreme
returns. If not, then your data is suspect.

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

Quantitative traders use a good variety of performance measures.
Which set of numbers to use is sometimes a matter of personal pref-
erence, but with ease of comparisons across different strategies and
traders in mind, I would argue that the Sharpe ratio and drawdowns
are the two most important. Notice that I did not include average an-
nualized returns, the measure most commonly quoted by investors,
because if you use this measure, you have to tell people a number
of things about what denominator you use to calculate returns. For
example, in a long-short strategy, did you use just one side of capital
or both sides in the denominator? Is the return a leveraged one (the
denominator is based on account equity), or is it unleveraged (the
denominator is based on market value of the portfolio)? If the equity
or market value changes daily, do you use a moving average as the
denominator, or just the value at the end of each day or each month?
Most (but not all) of these problems associated with comparing re-
turns can be avoided by quoting Sharpe ratio and drawdown instead
as the standard performance measures.

    I introduced the concepts of the Sharpe ratio, maximum draw-
down, and maximum drawdown duration in Chapter 2. Here, I will
just note a number of subtleties associated with calculating the
Sharpe ratio, and give some computational examples in both Excel
and MATLAB.

    There is one subtlety that often confounds even seasoned port-
folio managers when they calculate Sharpe ratios: should we or
shouldn't we subtract the risk-free rate from the returns of a dollar-
neutral portfolio? The answer is no. A dollar-neutral portfolio is
44  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

self-financing, meaning the cash you get from selling short pays for
the purchase of the long securities, so the financing cost (due to the
spread between the credit and debit interest rates) is small and can
be neglected for many backtesting purposes. Meanwhile, the mar-
gin balance you have to maintain earns a credit interest close to the
risk-free rate rF. So let's say the strategy return (the portfolio return
minus the contribution from the credit interest) is R, and the risk-
free rate is rF. Then the excess return used in calculating the Sharpe
ratio is R + rF ｭ rF = R. So, essentially, you can ignore the risk-free
rate in the whole calculation and just focus on the returns due to
your stock positions.

    Similarly, if you have a long-only day-trading strategy that does
not hold positions overnight, you again have no need to subtract the
risk-free rate from the strategy return in order to obtain the excess
returns, since you do not have financing costs in this case, either. In
general, you need to subtract the risk-free rate from your strategy
returns in calculating the Sharpe ratio only if your strategy incurs
financing cost.

    To further facilitate comparison across strategies, most traders
annualize the Sharpe ratio. Most people know how to annualize the
average returns. For example, if you have been using monthly re-
turns, then the average annual return is just 12 times the average
monthly return.

    However, annualizing the standard deviation of returns is a bit
trickier. Here, based on the assumption that the monthly returns are
serially uncorrelated (Sharpe, 1994), the annual standard deviation
of returns is 12 times the monthly standarddeviation. Hence, over-
all, the annualized Sharpe ratio would be 12 times the monthly
Sharpe ratio.

    In general, if you calculate your average and standard deviation
of returns based on a certain trading period T, whether T is a month,
a day, or an hour, and you want to annualize these quantities, you
have to first find out how many such trading periods there are in a
year (call it NT). Then

    Annualized Sharpe Ratio = NT ﾗ Sharpe Ratio Based on T
Backtesting  45

For example, if your strategy holds positions only during the NYSE
market hours (9:30ｭ16:00 ET), and the average hourly returns is R,
and the standard deviation of the hourly returns is s, then the annu-
alized Sharpe ratio is 1638 ﾗ R/s. This is because NT = (252 trad-
ing days) ﾗ (6.5 trading hours per trading day) = 1,638. (A common
mistake is to compute NT as 252 ﾗ 24 = 6,048.)

Example 3.4: Calculating Sharpe Ratio for Long-Only Versus
Market-Neutral Strategies

Let's calculate the Sharpe ratio of a trivial long-only strategy for IGE: buy-
ing and holding a share since the close of November 26, 2001, and selling
it at close of November 14, 2007. Assume the average risk-free rate dur-
ing this period is 4 percent per annum in this example. You can download
the daily prices from Yahoo! Finance, specifying the date range desired,
and store them as an Excel file (not the default comma-separated file),
which you can call IGE.xls. The next steps can be done in either Excel or
MATLAB:

Using Excel

 1. The file should have columns AｭG already from the download.
 2. Sort all the columns in ascending order of Date (use the Data-Sort

      function, choose the "Expand the selection" radio button, and choose
      the "Ascending" as well as the "My data has Header row" radio
      buttons).
 3. In cell H3, type "=(G3-G2)/G2". This is the daily return.
 4. Double-clicking the little black dot at the lower right corner of the
      cell H3 will populate the entire column H with daily returns of
      IGE.
 5. For clarity, you can type "Dailyret" in the header cell H1.
 6. In cell I3, type "=H3-0.04/252", which is the excess daily return, as-
      suming a 4 percent per annum risk-free rate and 252 trading days in a
      year.
 7. Double-clicking the little black dot at the lower right corner of cell I3
      will populate the entire column I with excess daily returns.
 8. For clarity, type "Excess Dailyret" in the header cell I1.
46  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

  9. In cell I1506 (the last row in the next column), type
       "=SQRT(252)*AVERAGE(I3:I1505)/STDEV(I3:I1505)".

10. The number displayed in cell I1505, which should be "0.789317538",
       is the Sharpe ratio of this buy-and-hold strategy.

       The finished spreadsheet is available at my web site at epchan.com/
book/example3 4.xls.

Using MATLAB

% make sure previously defined variables are erased.
clear;

% read a spreadsheet named "IGE.xls" into MATLAB.
[num, txt]=xlsread(`IGE');

% the first column (starting from the second row)
% contains the trading days in format mm/dd/yyyy.
tday=txt(2:end, 1);

% convert the format into yyyymmdd.
tday=datestr(datenum(tday, `mm/dd/yyyy'), `yyyymmdd');
% convert the date strings first into cell arrays and
% then into numeric format.
tday=str2double(cellstr(tday));
% the last column contains the adjusted close prices.
cls=num(:, end);
% sort tday into ascending order.
[tday sortIndex]=sort(tday, `ascend');
% sort cls into ascending order of dates.
cls=cls(sortIndex);
% daily returns
dailyret=(cls(2:end)-cls(1:end-1))./cls(1:end-1);
% excess daily returns assuming risk-free rate of 4%
% per annum and 252 trading days in a year
excessRet=dailyret - 0.04/252;
% the output should be 0.7893
sharpeRatio=sqrt(252)*mean(excessRet)/std(excessRet)

      This MATLAB code is also available for download at my web site
(epchan.com/book/example3 4.m).

      Now let's calculate the Sharpe ratio of a long-short market-neutral strat-
egy. In fact, it is a very trivial twist of the buy-and-hold strategy above: at the
time we bought IGE, let's suppose we just shorted an equal dollar amount
of Standard & Poor's depositary receipts (SPY) as a hedge, and closed both
Backtesting  47

positions at the same time in November 2007. You can also download SPY
from Yahoo! Finance and store it in a file SPY.xls. You can go through very
similar steps as above in both Excel and MATLAB, and I will leave it as an
exercise for the reader to perform the exact steps:

Using Excel

 1. Sort the columns in SPY.xls in ascending order of date just like above.
 2. Copy column G (Adj Close) in SPY.xls and paste it onto column J of

      IGE.xls above.
 3. Check that column J has the same number of rows as columns AｭI. If

      not, you have a different set of dates--make sure you download the
      matching date range from Yahoo!.
 4. Perform the same steps as above to calculate the daily returns in col-
      umn K.
 5. For clarity, type "dailyretSPY" as the header in column K.
 6. In column L, compute the net returns for the hedged strategy as the
      difference between column H and K divided by 2. (Divide by 2 because
      we now have twice the capital.)
 7. In cell L1506, compute the Sharpe ratio of this hedged strategy. You
      should get "0.783681".

Using MATLAB
% Assume this is a continuation of the above MATLAB
%code.

% Insert your own code here to retrieve data from
% SPY.xls just as above.

% Name the array that contains the daily returns of
% SPY "dailyretSPY".

% net daily returns
(divide by 2 because we now have twice as much capital.)
netRet=(dailyret - dailyretSPY)/2;

% the output should be 0.7837.
sharpeRatio=sqrt(252)*mean(excessRet)/std(excessRet)
48  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

Example 3.5: Calculating Maximum Drawdown and Maximum
Drawdown Duration

We shall continue the preceding long-short market-neutral example in order
to illustrate the calculation of maximum drawdown and maximum draw-
down duration. The first step in this calculation is to calculate the "high
watermark" at the close of each day, which is the maximum cumulative re-
turn of the strategy up to that time. (Using the cumulative return curve to
calculate high watermark and drawdown is equivalent to using the equity
curve, since equity is nothing more than initial investment times 1 plus the
cumulative return.) From the high watermark, we can calculate the draw-
down, the maximum drawdown, and maximum drawdown duration.

Using Excel

 1. In cell M3, type "=L3".
 2. In cell M4, type "=(1+M3)*(1+L4)-1". This is the cumulative com-

      pounded return of the strategy up to that day. Populate the entire col-
      umn M with the cumulative compounded returns of the strategy and
      erase the last cell of the column. Name this column Cumret.
 3. In cell N3, type "=M3".
 4. In cell N4, type "=MAX(N3, M4)". This is the high watermark up to that
      day. Populate the entire column N with the running high watermark of
      the strategy and erase the last cell of the column. Name this column
      High watermark.
 5. In cell O3, type "=(1+N3)/(1+M3)-1". This is the drawdown at that day's
      close. Populate the entire column O with the drawdowns of the strategy.
 6. In cell O1506, type "=MAX(O3:O1505)". This is the maximum draw-
      down of the strategy. It should have a value of about 0.1053, that is, a
      maximum drawdown of 10.53 percent.
 7. In cell P3, type "=IF(O3=0, 0, P2+1)". This is the duration of the current
      drawdown. Populate the entire column R with the drawdown durations
      of the strategy and erase the last cell of the column.
 8. In cell P1506, type "=MAX(P3:P1505)". This is the maximum drawdown
      duration of the strategy. It should have a value of 497, that is, a maxi-
      mum drawdown duration of 497 trading days.

Using MATLAB

% Assume this is a continuation of the above MATLAB
% code.
% cumulative compounded returns
Backtesting  49

cumret=cumprod(1+netRet)-1;plot(cumret);

[maxDrawdown maxDrawdownDuration]=...
calculateMaxDD(cumret);

 [maxDrawdown maxDrawdownDuration]=...
calculateMaxDD(cumret);

% maximum drawdown. Output should be 0.1053
maxDrawdown
% maximum drawdown duration. Output should be 497.
maxDrawdownDuration

Notice the code fragment above calls a function "calculateMaxDrawdown,"
which I display below.

function [maxDD maxDDD]=calculateMaxDD(cumret)
% [maxDD maxDDD]=calculateMaxDD(cumret)
% calculation of maximum drawdown and maximum drawdown
% duration based on cumulative compounded returns.

% initialize high watermarks to zero.
highwatermark=zeros(size(cumret));
% initialize drawdowns to zero.
drawdown=zeros(size(cumret));
% initialize drawdown duration to zero.
drawdownduration=zeros(size(cumret));
for t=2:length(cumret)

       highwatermark(t)=...
max(highwatermark(t-1), cumret(t));

       % drawdown on each day
 drawdown(t)=(1+highwatermark(t))/(1+cumret(t))-1;

       if (drawdown(t)==0)
              drawdownduration(t)=0;

       else
              drawdownduration(t)=drawdownduration(t-1)+1;

       end
end

maxDD=max(drawdown); % maximum drawdown

% maximum drawdown duration
maxDDD=max(drawdownduration);

      The file that contains this function is available as epchan.com/book/
calculateMaxDD.m. You can see where the maximum drawdown and
50                                                                           QUANTITATIVE TRADING

maximum drawdown duration occurred in this plot of the cumulative re-
turns in Figure 3.1.

                    0.6

                    0.5

Cumulative Returns  0.4                                                      10.53% max drawdown

                    0.3

                    0.2

                                       497 days max drawdown duration

                    0.1

                    0

-0.1                     200  400  600                                 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
      0

                                                                       Days

FIGURE 3.1 Maximum drawdown and maximum drawdown duration for
Example 3.4

COMMON BACKTESTING PITFALLS
TO AVOID

Backtesting is the process of creating the historical trades given the
historical information available at that time, and then finding out
what the subsequent performance of those trades is. This process
seems easy given that the trades were made using a computer algo-
rithm in our case, but there are numerous ways in which it can go
wrong. Usually, an erroneous backtest would produce a historical
performance that is better than what we would have obtained in ac-
tual trading. We have already seen how survivorship bias in the data
used for backtesting can result in inflated performance. There are,
Backtesting  51

however, other common pitfalls related to how the backtest pro-
gram is written, or more fundamentally, to how you construct your
trading strategy. I will describe two of the most common ones here,
with tips on how to avoid them.

Look-Ahead Bias

This error refers to the situation when you are using information
that was available only at a time ahead of the instant the trade was
made. For example, if your trade entry rule reads: "Buy when the
stock is within 1 percent of the day's low," you have introduced a
look-ahead bias in your strategy, because you could not possibly
have known what the day's low was until the market closed that
day. Another example: Suppose a model involves a linear regression
fit of two price series. If you use the regression coefficients obtained
from the entire data set to determine your daily trading signals, you
have again introduced look-ahead bias.

    How do we avoid look-ahead bias? Use lagged historical data
for calculating signals at every opportunity. Lagging a series of data
means that you calculate all the quantities like moving averages,
highs and lows, or even volume, based on data up to the close of the
previous trading period only. (Of course, you needn't lag the data if
your strategy enters only at the close of the period.)

    Look-ahead bias is easier to avoid using Excel or other WYSI-
WYG programs than using MATLAB. This is because it is easy to
align all the different columns of data in Excel and ensure that the
formula in each cell is computed based on the rows above the cur-
rent row. It would be visually obvious when one is using current
day's data in generating signals, given the cell-highlighting function-
ality in Excel. (Double-clicking a cell with a formula will highlight
the cells of data this formula utilizes.) With MATLAB, you have to
be more careful and remember to run a lag function on certain se-
ries used for signal generation.

    Even with all the care and caution that goes into creating a
backtest program without look-ahead bias, sometimes we may
still let some of it slip in. Some look-ahead bias is quite subtle in
nature and not easy to avoid, especially if you are using MATLAB.
