38                         QUANTITATIVE TRADING

called a reverse split) with an ex-date of T, all the prices before T
need to be multiplied by 1/N. Similarly, when a company issued a
dividend $d per share with an ex-date of T, all the prices before T
need to be multiplied by the number (Close(T Ł 1) Ł d)/Close(T Ł
1), where Close(T Ł 1) is the closing price of the trading day before
T. Notice that I adjust the historical prices by a multiplier instead
of subtracting $d so that the historical daily returns will remain the
same pre- and postadjustment. This is the way Yahoo! Finance ad-
justs its historical data, and is the most common way. (If you adjust
by subtracting $d instead, the historical daily changes in prices will
be the same pre- and postadjustment, but not the daily returns.) If
the historical data are not adjusted, you will find a drop in price
at the ex-date's market open from previous day's close (apart from
normal market fluctuation), which may trigger an erroneous trading
signal.

    I recommend getting historical data that are already split and
dividend adjusted, because otherwise you would have to find a
separate historical database (such as earnings.com) of splits and
dividends and apply the adjustments yourself--a somewhat te-
dious and error-prone task, which I will describe in the following
example.

Example 3.2: Adjusting for Splits and Dividends

Here we look at IGE, an ETF that has had both splits and dividends in its
history. It had a 2:1 split on June 9, 2005 (the ex-date). Let's look at the
unadjusted prices around that date (you can download the historical prices
of IGE from Yahoo! Finance into an Excel spreadsheet):

Date       Open     High    Low                  Close

6/10/2005   73.98   74.08   73.31                 74
6/9/2005    72.45   73.74   72.23                 73.74
6/8/2005   144.13  146.44  143.75                144.48
6/7/2005   145     146.07  144.11                144.11
Backtesting                                                                                 39

    We need to adjust the prices prior to 6/9/2005 due to this split. This

is  easy:  N  =  2  here,  and  all  we  need  to  do  is  to  multiply  those  prices  by  1  .
                                                                                            2

The following table shows the adjusted prices:

Date                       Open          High                   Low             Close

6/10/2005                  73.98         74.08                 73.31            74
6/9/2005                   72.45         73.74                 72.23            73.74
6/8/2005                   72.065        73.22                 71.875           72.24
6/7/2005                   72.5          73.035                72.055           72.055

      Now, the astute reader will notice that the adjusted close prices here
do not match the adjusted close prices displayed in the Yahoo! Finance
table. The reason for this is that there have been dividends distributed af-
ter 6/9/2005, so the Yahoo! prices have been adjusted for all those as
well. Since each adjustment is a multiplier, the aggregate adjustment is
just the product of all the individual multipliers. Here are the dividends
from 6/9/2005 to November 2007, together with the unadjusted closing
prices of the previous trading days and the resulting individual multipliers:

Ex-Date                    Dividend                Prev Close                   Multiplier

9/26/2007                     0.177                   128.08                    0.998618
6/29/2007                     0.3                     119.44                    0.997488
12/21/2006                    0.322                   102.61                    0.996862
9/27/2006                     0.258                                             0.997181
6/23/2006                     0.32                      91.53                   0.996529
3/27/2006                     0.253                     92.2                    0.997331
12/23/2005                    0.236                     94.79                   0.997374
9/26/2005                     0.184                     89.87                   0.997933
6/21/2005                     0.217                     89                      0.997214
                                                        77.9

      (Check out the multipliers yourself on Excel using the formula I gave
above to see if they agree with my values here.) So the aggregate multi-
plier for the dividends is simply 0.998618 ū 0.997488 ū Ę Ę Ę ū 0.997214 =
0.976773. This multiplier should be applied to all the unadjusted prices
on or after 6/9/2005. The aggregate multiplier for the dividends and the
split is 0.976773 ū 0.5 = 0.488386, which should be applied to all the
40                                         QUANTITATIVE TRADING

unadjusted prices before 6/9/2005. So let's look at the resulting adjusted
prices after applying these multipliers:

Date         Open           High      Low            Close

6/10/2005  72.26163      72.35931  71.6072         72.28117
6/9/2005   70.76717      72.02721  70.55228        72.02721
6/8/2005   70.39111      71.51929  70.20553        70.56205
6/7/2005   70.81601      71.33858  70.38135        70.38135

Now compare with the table from Yahoo! around November 1, 2007:

Date       Open High Low Close Volume Adj Close

6/10/2005 73.98   74.08   73.31     74     179300  72.28
6/9/2005 72.45    73.74   72.23     73.74  853200  72.03
6/8/2005 144.13  146.44  143.75    144.48  109600  70.56
6/7/2005 145     146.07  144.11    144.11  58000   70.38

      You can see that the adjusted closing prices from our calculations and
from Yahoo! are the same (after rounding to two decimal places). But, of
course, when you are reading this, IGE will likely have distributed more
dividends and may have even split further, so your Yahoo! table won't look
like the one above. It is a good exercise to check that you can make further
adjustments based on those dividends and splits that result in the same
adjusted prices as your current Yahoo! table.

Are the Data Survivorship Bias Free?

We already covered this issue in Chapter 2. Unfortunately, databases
that are free from survivorship bias are quite expensive and may
not be affordable for a start-up business. One way to overcome this
problem is to start collecting point-in-time data yourself for the ben-
efit of your future backtest. If you save the prices each day of all the
stocks in your universe to a file, then you will have a point-in-time
or survivorship-bias-free database to use in the future. Another way
to lessen the impact of survivorship bias is to backtest your strate-
gies on more recent data so that the results are not distorted by too
many missing stocks.
Example 3.3: An Example of How Survivorship Bias Can
Artificially Inflate a Strategy's Performance

Here is a toy "buy low-price stocks" strategy (Warning: This toy strategy is
hazardous to your financial health!). Let's say from a universe of the 1,000
largest stocks (based on market capitalization), we pick 10 that have the
lowest closing prices at the beginning of the year and hold them (with equal
initial capital) for one year. Let's look at what we would have picked if we
had a good, survivorship-bias-free database:

SYMBOL  Closing Price  Closing Price  Terminal Price
        on 1/2/2001    on 1/2/2002
ETYS                                          0.125
MDM          0.2188           NaN             0.49
INTW         0.3125           0.49            0.11
FDHG         0.4063           NaN             0.33
OGNC         0.5              NaN             0.2
MPLX         0.6875           NaN             0.8
GTS          0.7188           NaN             0.35
BUYX         0.75             NaN             0.17
PSIX         0.75             NaN             0.2188
             0.75             NaN

      All but MDM were delisted sometime between 1/2/2001 and 1/2/2002
(after all, the dot-com bubble was seriously bursting then!). The NaNs indi-
cate those with nonexistent closing prices on 1/2/2002. The Terminal Price
column indicates the last prices at which the stocks were traded on or before
1/2/2002. The total return on this portfolio in that year was Ł42 percent.

      Now, let's look at what we would have picked if our database had sur-
vivorship bias and actually missed all those stocks that were delisted that
year. We would then have picked the following list instead:

SYMBOL Closing Price on 1/2/2001 Closing Price on 1/2/2002

MDM     0.3125                         0.49
ENGA    0.8438                         0.44
NEOF    0.875                         27.9
ENP     0.875                          0.05
MVL     0.9583                         2.5
URBN    1.0156                         3.0688
FNV     1.0625                         0.81
APT     1.125                          0.88
FLIR    1.2813                         9.475
RAZF    1.3438                         0.25

                                               41
42  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

      Notice that since we select only those stocks that "survived" until at
least 1/2/2002, they all have closing prices on that day. The total return on
this portfolio was 388 percent!

      In this example, Ł42 percent was the actual return a trader would ex-
perience following this strategy, whereas 388 percent is a fictitious return
that was due to survivorship bias in our database.

Does Your Strategy Use High and Low Data?

For almost all daily stock data, the high and low prices are far noisier
than the open and close prices. What this means is that even when
you had placed a buy limit order below the recorded high of a day, it
might not have been filled, and vice versa for a sell limit order. (This
could be due to the fact that a very small order was transacted at the
high, or the execution could have occurred on a market to which
your order was not routed. Sometimes, the high or low is simply
due to an incorrectly reported tick that was not filtered out.) Hence,
a backtest that relies on high and low data is less reliable than one
that relies on the open and close.

    Actually, sometimes even a market on open (MOO) or market
on close (MOC) order might not be filled at the historical open
and close prices shown in your data. This is due to the fact that
the historical prices shown may be due to the primary exchange
(e.g., New York Stock Exchange [NYSE]), or it may be a composite
price including all the regional exchanges. Depending on where your
order was routed, it may be filled at a different price from the his-
torical opening or closing price shown in your dataset. Neverthe-
less, the discrepancies of the open and close prices usually have
less impact on backtest performance than the errors in the high
and low prices, since the latter almost always inflate your backtest
returns.

    After retrieving the data from a database, it is often advisable to
do a quick error check. The simplest way to do this is to calculate
the daily returns based on the data. If you have open, high, low, and
close prices, you can calculate the various combinations of daily
returns such as from the previous high to today's close as well. You
Backtesting  43

can then examine closely those days with returns that are, say, 4
standard deviations away from the average. Typically, an extreme
return should be accompanied by a news announcement, or should
occur on a day when the market index also experienced extreme
returns. If not, then your data is suspect.

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

Quantitative traders use a good variety of performance measures.
Which set of numbers to use is sometimes a matter of personal pref-
erence, but with ease of comparisons across different strategies and
traders in mind, I would argue that the Sharpe ratio and drawdowns
are the two most important. Notice that I did not include average an-
nualized returns, the measure most commonly quoted by investors,
because if you use this measure, you have to tell people a number
of things about what denominator you use to calculate returns. For
example, in a long-short strategy, did you use just one side of capital
or both sides in the denominator? Is the return a leveraged one (the
denominator is based on account equity), or is it unleveraged (the
denominator is based on market value of the portfolio)? If the equity
or market value changes daily, do you use a moving average as the
denominator, or just the value at the end of each day or each month?
Most (but not all) of these problems associated with comparing re-
turns can be avoided by quoting Sharpe ratio and drawdown instead
as the standard performance measures.

    I introduced the concepts of the Sharpe ratio, maximum draw-
down, and maximum drawdown duration in Chapter 2. Here, I will
just note a number of subtleties associated with calculating the
Sharpe ratio, and give some computational examples in both Excel
and MATLAB.

    There is one subtlety that often confounds even seasoned port-
folio managers when they calculate Sharpe ratios: should we or
shouldn't we subtract the risk-free rate from the returns of a dollar-
neutral portfolio? The answer is no. A dollar-neutral portfolio is
44  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

self-financing, meaning the cash you get from selling short pays for
the purchase of the long securities, so the financing cost (due to the
spread between the credit and debit interest rates) is small and can
be neglected for many backtesting purposes. Meanwhile, the mar-
gin balance you have to maintain earns a credit interest close to the
risk-free rate rF. So let's say the strategy return (the portfolio return
minus the contribution from the credit interest) is R, and the risk-
free rate is rF. Then the excess return used in calculating the Sharpe
ratio is R + rF Ł rF = R. So, essentially, you can ignore the risk-free
rate in the whole calculation and just focus on the returns due to
your stock positions.

    Similarly, if you have a long-only day-trading strategy that does
not hold positions overnight, you again have no need to subtract the
risk-free rate from the strategy return in order to obtain the excess
returns, since you do not have financing costs in this case, either. In
general, you need to subtract the risk-free rate from your strategy
returns in calculating the Sharpe ratio only if your strategy incurs
financing cost.

    To further facilitate comparison across strategies, most traders
annualize the Sharpe ratio. Most people know how to annualize the
average returns. For example, if you have been using monthly re-
turns, then the average annual return is just 12 times the average
monthly return.

    However, annualizing the standard deviation of returns is a bit
trickier. Here, based on the assumption that the monthly returns are
serially uncorrelated (Sharpe, 1994), the annual standard deviation
of returns is 12 times the monthly standarddeviation. Hence, over-
all, the annualized Sharpe ratio would be 12 times the monthly
Sharpe ratio.

    In general, if you calculate your average and standard deviation
of returns based on a certain trading period T, whether T is a month,
a day, or an hour, and you want to annualize these quantities, you
have to first find out how many such trading periods there are in a
year (call it NT). Then

    Annualized Sharpe Ratio = NT ū Sharpe Ratio Based on T
Backtesting  45

For example, if your strategy holds positions only during the NYSE
market hours (9:30Ł16:00 ET), and the average hourly returns is R,
and the standard deviation of the hourly returns is s, then the annu-
alized Sharpe ratio is 1638 ū R/s. This is because NT = (252 trad-
ing days) ū (6.5 trading hours per trading day) = 1,638. (A common
mistake is to compute NT as 252 ū 24 = 6,048.)

Example 3.4: Calculating Sharpe Ratio for Long-Only Versus
Market-Neutral Strategies

Let's calculate the Sharpe ratio of a trivial long-only strategy for IGE: buy-
ing and holding a share since the close of November 26, 2001, and selling
it at close of November 14, 2007. Assume the average risk-free rate dur-
ing this period is 4 percent per annum in this example. You can download
the daily prices from Yahoo! Finance, specifying the date range desired,
and store them as an Excel file (not the default comma-separated file),
which you can call IGE.xls. The next steps can be done in either Excel or
MATLAB:

Using Excel

 1. The file should have columns AŁG already from the download.
 2. Sort all the columns in ascending order of Date (use the Data-Sort

      function, choose the "Expand the selection" radio button, and choose
      the "Ascending" as well as the "My data has Header row" radio
      buttons).
 3. In cell H3, type "=(G3-G2)/G2". This is the daily return.
 4. Double-clicking the little black dot at the lower right corner of the
      cell H3 will populate the entire column H with daily returns of
      IGE.
 5. For clarity, you can type "Dailyret" in the header cell H1.
 6. In cell I3, type "=H3-0.04/252", which is the excess daily return, as-
      suming a 4 percent per annum risk-free rate and 252 trading days in a
      year.
 7. Double-clicking the little black dot at the lower right corner of cell I3
      will populate the entire column I with excess daily returns.
 8. For clarity, type "Excess Dailyret" in the header cell I1.
46  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

  9. In cell I1506 (the last row in the next column), type
       "=SQRT(252)*AVERAGE(I3:I1505)/STDEV(I3:I1505)".

10. The number displayed in cell I1505, which should be "0.789317538",
       is the Sharpe ratio of this buy-and-hold strategy.

       The finished spreadsheet is available at my web site at epchan.com/
book/example3 4.xls.

Using MATLAB

% make sure previously defined variables are erased.
clear;

% read a spreadsheet named "IGE.xls" into MATLAB.
[num, txt]=xlsread(`IGE');

% the first column (starting from the second row)
% contains the trading days in format mm/dd/yyyy.
tday=txt(2:end, 1);

% convert the format into yyyymmdd.
tday=datestr(datenum(tday, `mm/dd/yyyy'), `yyyymmdd');
% convert the date strings first into cell arrays and
% then into numeric format.
tday=str2double(cellstr(tday));
% the last column contains the adjusted close prices.
cls=num(:, end);
% sort tday into ascending order.
[tday sortIndex]=sort(tday, `ascend');
% sort cls into ascending order of dates.
cls=cls(sortIndex);
% daily returns
dailyret=(cls(2:end)-cls(1:end-1))./cls(1:end-1);
% excess daily returns assuming risk-free rate of 4%
% per annum and 252 trading days in a year
excessRet=dailyret - 0.04/252;
% the output should be 0.7893
sharpeRatio=sqrt(252)*mean(excessRet)/std(excessRet)

      This MATLAB code is also available for download at my web site
(epchan.com/book/example3 4.m).

      Now let's calculate the Sharpe ratio of a long-short market-neutral strat-
egy. In fact, it is a very trivial twist of the buy-and-hold strategy above: at the
time we bought IGE, let's suppose we just shorted an equal dollar amount
of Standard & Poor's depositary receipts (SPY) as a hedge, and closed both
Backtesting  47

positions at the same time in November 2007. You can also download SPY
from Yahoo! Finance and store it in a file SPY.xls. You can go through very
similar steps as above in both Excel and MATLAB, and I will leave it as an
exercise for the reader to perform the exact steps:

Using Excel

 1. Sort the columns in SPY.xls in ascending order of date just like above.
 2. Copy column G (Adj Close) in SPY.xls and paste it onto column J of

      IGE.xls above.
 3. Check that column J has the same number of rows as columns AŁI. If

      not, you have a different set of dates--make sure you download the
      matching date range from Yahoo!.
 4. Perform the same steps as above to calculate the daily returns in col-
      umn K.
 5. For clarity, type "dailyretSPY" as the header in column K.
 6. In column L, compute the net returns for the hedged strategy as the
      difference between column H and K divided by 2. (Divide by 2 because
      we now have twice the capital.)
 7. In cell L1506, compute the Sharpe ratio of this hedged strategy. You
      should get "0.783681".

Using MATLAB
% Assume this is a continuation of the above MATLAB
%code.

% Insert your own code here to retrieve data from
% SPY.xls just as above.

% Name the array that contains the daily returns of
% SPY "dailyretSPY".

% net daily returns
(divide by 2 because we now have twice as much capital.)
netRet=(dailyret - dailyretSPY)/2;

% the output should be 0.7837.
sharpeRatio=sqrt(252)*mean(excessRet)/std(excessRet)
48  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

Example 3.5: Calculating Maximum Drawdown and Maximum
Drawdown Duration

We shall continue the preceding long-short market-neutral example in order
to illustrate the calculation of maximum drawdown and maximum draw-
down duration. The first step in this calculation is to calculate the "high
watermark" at the close of each day, which is the maximum cumulative re-
turn of the strategy up to that time. (Using the cumulative return curve to
calculate high watermark and drawdown is equivalent to using the equity
curve, since equity is nothing more than initial investment times 1 plus the
cumulative return.) From the high watermark, we can calculate the draw-
down, the maximum drawdown, and maximum drawdown duration.

Using Excel

 1. In cell M3, type "=L3".
 2. In cell M4, type "=(1+M3)*(1+L4)-1". This is the cumulative com-

      pounded return of the strategy up to that day. Populate the entire col-
      umn M with the cumulative compounded returns of the strategy and
      erase the last cell of the column. Name this column Cumret.
 3. In cell N3, type "=M3".
 4. In cell N4, type "=MAX(N3, M4)". This is the high watermark up to that
      day. Populate the entire column N with the running high watermark of
      the strategy and erase the last cell of the column. Name this column
      High watermark.
 5. In cell O3, type "=(1+N3)/(1+M3)-1". This is the drawdown at that day's
      close. Populate the entire column O with the drawdowns of the strategy.
 6. In cell O1506, type "=MAX(O3:O1505)". This is the maximum draw-
      down of the strategy. It should have a value of about 0.1053, that is, a
      maximum drawdown of 10.53 percent.
 7. In cell P3, type "=IF(O3=0, 0, P2+1)". This is the duration of the current
      drawdown. Populate the entire column R with the drawdown durations
      of the strategy and erase the last cell of the column.
 8. In cell P1506, type "=MAX(P3:P1505)". This is the maximum drawdown
      duration of the strategy. It should have a value of 497, that is, a maxi-
      mum drawdown duration of 497 trading days.

Using MATLAB

% Assume this is a continuation of the above MATLAB
% code.
% cumulative compounded returns
Backtesting  49

cumret=cumprod(1+netRet)-1;plot(cumret);

[maxDrawdown maxDrawdownDuration]=...
calculateMaxDD(cumret);

 [maxDrawdown maxDrawdownDuration]=...
calculateMaxDD(cumret);

% maximum drawdown. Output should be 0.1053
maxDrawdown
% maximum drawdown duration. Output should be 497.
maxDrawdownDuration

Notice the code fragment above calls a function "calculateMaxDrawdown,"
which I display below.

function [maxDD maxDDD]=calculateMaxDD(cumret)
% [maxDD maxDDD]=calculateMaxDD(cumret)
% calculation of maximum drawdown and maximum drawdown
% duration based on cumulative compounded returns.

% initialize high watermarks to zero.
highwatermark=zeros(size(cumret));
% initialize drawdowns to zero.
drawdown=zeros(size(cumret));
% initialize drawdown duration to zero.
drawdownduration=zeros(size(cumret));
for t=2:length(cumret)

       highwatermark(t)=...
max(highwatermark(t-1), cumret(t));

       % drawdown on each day
 drawdown(t)=(1+highwatermark(t))/(1+cumret(t))-1;

       if (drawdown(t)==0)
              drawdownduration(t)=0;

       else
              drawdownduration(t)=drawdownduration(t-1)+1;

       end
end

maxDD=max(drawdown); % maximum drawdown

% maximum drawdown duration
maxDDD=max(drawdownduration);

      The file that contains this function is available as epchan.com/book/
calculateMaxDD.m. You can see where the maximum drawdown and
50                                                                           QUANTITATIVE TRADING

maximum drawdown duration occurred in this plot of the cumulative re-
turns in Figure 3.1.

                    0.6

                    0.5

Cumulative Returns  0.4                                                      10.53% max drawdown

                    0.3

                    0.2

                                       497 days max drawdown duration

                    0.1

                    0

-0.1                     200  400  600                                 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
      0

                                                                       Days

FIGURE 3.1 Maximum drawdown and maximum drawdown duration for
Example 3.4

COMMON BACKTESTING PITFALLS
TO AVOID

Backtesting is the process of creating the historical trades given the
historical information available at that time, and then finding out
what the subsequent performance of those trades is. This process
seems easy given that the trades were made using a computer algo-
rithm in our case, but there are numerous ways in which it can go
wrong. Usually, an erroneous backtest would produce a historical
performance that is better than what we would have obtained in ac-
tual trading. We have already seen how survivorship bias in the data
used for backtesting can result in inflated performance. There are,
Backtesting  51

however, other common pitfalls related to how the backtest pro-
gram is written, or more fundamentally, to how you construct your
trading strategy. I will describe two of the most common ones here,
with tips on how to avoid them.

Look-Ahead Bias

This error refers to the situation when you are using information
that was available only at a time ahead of the instant the trade was
made. For example, if your trade entry rule reads: "Buy when the
stock is within 1 percent of the day's low," you have introduced a
look-ahead bias in your strategy, because you could not possibly
have known what the day's low was until the market closed that
day. Another example: Suppose a model involves a linear regression
fit of two price series. If you use the regression coefficients obtained
from the entire data set to determine your daily trading signals, you
have again introduced look-ahead bias.

    How do we avoid look-ahead bias? Use lagged historical data
for calculating signals at every opportunity. Lagging a series of data
means that you calculate all the quantities like moving averages,
highs and lows, or even volume, based on data up to the close of the
previous trading period only. (Of course, you needn't lag the data if
your strategy enters only at the close of the period.)

    Look-ahead bias is easier to avoid using Excel or other WYSI-
WYG programs than using MATLAB. This is because it is easy to
align all the different columns of data in Excel and ensure that the
formula in each cell is computed based on the rows above the cur-
rent row. It would be visually obvious when one is using current
day's data in generating signals, given the cell-highlighting function-
ality in Excel. (Double-clicking a cell with a formula will highlight
the cells of data this formula utilizes.) With MATLAB, you have to
be more careful and remember to run a lag function on certain se-
ries used for signal generation.

    Even with all the care and caution that goes into creating a
backtest program without look-ahead bias, sometimes we may
still let some of it slip in. Some look-ahead bias is quite subtle in
nature and not easy to avoid, especially if you are using MATLAB.
52  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

It is best to do a final checkup of your MATLAB backtest program
using this method: Run the program using all your historical data;
generate and save the resulting position file to file A (position file
is the file that contains all the recommended positions generated
by the program on each day). Now truncate your historical data so
that the most recent portion (say N days) is removed. So if the last
day in the original data is T, then the last day in the truncated data
should be T-N. N could be 10 days to 100 days. Now run the back-
test program again using the truncated data and save the resulting
positions into a new file B. Truncate the most recent N rows of the
positions file A so that both A and B have the same number of rows
(days) in them, and the last day in both file A and B should be T-N.
Finally, check if A and B are identical in their positions. If not, you
have a look-ahead bias in your backtest program that you must find
and correct, because the discrepancies in positions mean that you
are inadvertently using the truncated part of the historical data (the
part that lies ahead of day T-N) in determining the positions in file
A. I will illustrate this somewhat convoluted procedure at the end of
Example 3.6.

Data-Snooping Bias

In Chapter 2, I mentioned data-snooping bias--the danger that back-
test performance is inflated relative to the future performance of
the strategy because we have overoptimized the parameters of the
model based on transient noise in the historical data. Data snoop-
ing bias is pervasive in the business of predictive statistical models
of historical data, but is especially serious in finance because of the
limited amount of independent data we have. High-frequency data,
while in abundant supply, is useful only for high-frequency models.
And while we have stock market data stretching back to the early
parts of the twentieth century, only data within the past 10 years
are really suitable for building predictive model. Furthermore, as
discussed in Chapter 2, regime shifts may render even data that are
just a few years old obsolete for backtesting purposes. The less inde-
pendent data you have, the fewer adjustable parameters you should
employ in your trading model.
Backtesting  53

    As a rule of thumb, I would not employ more than five param-
eters, including quantities such as entry and exit thresholds, hold-
ing period, or the lookback period, in computing moving averages.
Furthermore, not all data-snooping bias is due to the optimization
of parameters. Numerous choices one makes in creating a trad-
ing model can be affected by repeated backtesting on the same
data set--decisions such as whether to enter at the open or close,
whether to hold the positions overnight, whether to trade large-cap
or mid-cap stocks. Often, these qualitative decisions are made to
optimize the backtest performance, but they may not be optimal go-
ing forward. It is almost impossible to completely eliminate data-
snooping bias as long as we are building data-driven models. How-
ever, there are ways to mitigate the bias.

Sample Size The most basic safeguard against data-snooping bias
is to ensure that you have a sufficient amount of backtest data rel-
ative to the number of free parameters you want to optimize. As a
rule of thumb, let's assume that the number of data points needed
for optimizing your parameters is equal to 252 times the number
of free parameters your model has. (This assumption of propor-
tionality is not based on any survey of the vast statistical litera-
ture, but purely on experience.) So, for example, let's assume you
have a daily trading model with three parameters. Then you should
have at least three years' worth of backtest data with daily prices.
However, if you have a three-parameter trading model that updates
positions every minute, then you should have at least 252/390 year,
or about seven months, of one-minute backtest data. (Note that if
you have a daily trading model, then even if you have seven months
of minute-by-minute data points, effectively you only have about
7 ū 21 = 147 data points, far from sufficient for testing a three-
parameter model.)

Out-of-Sample Testing Divide your historical data into two parts.
Save the second (more recent) part of the data for out-of-sample
testing. When you build the model, optimize the parameters as well
as other qualitative decisions on the first portion (called the train-
ing set), but test the resulting model on the second portion (called
54  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

the test set). (The two portions should be roughly equal in size, but if
there is insufficient training data, we should at least have one-third
as much test data as training data. The minimum size of the training
set is determined by the rule of thumb in the previous section.) Ide-
ally, the set of optimal parameters and decisions for the first part of
the backtest period is also the optimal set for the second period, but
things are rarely this perfect. The performance on the second part
of the data should at least be reasonable. Otherwise, the model has
data-snooping bias built into it, and one way to cure it is to simplify
the model and eliminate some parameters.

    A more rigorous (albeit more computationally intensive)
method of out-of-sample testing is to use moving optimization of
the parameters. In this case, the parameters themselves are con-
stantly adapting to the changing historical data, and data-snooping
bias with respect to parameters is eliminated. (See the sidebar on
parameterless trading models.)

  PARAMETERLESS TRADING MODELS*

A portfolio manager whom I used to work for liked to proudly proclaim that
his trading models have "no free parameters." In keeping with the tradition of
secrecy in our industry, he would not divulge his technique further.

      Lately, I have begun to understand what a trading model with no free pa-
rameters means. It doesn't mean that it does not contain, for example, any
lookback period for calculating trends, or thresholds for entry or exit. I think
that would be impossible. It just means that all such parameters are dynami-
cally optimized in a moving lookback window. This way, if you ask, "Does the
model have a fixed profit cap?," the trader can honestly reply: "No, profit cap is
not an input parameter. It is determined by the model itself."

      The advantage of a parameterless trading model is that it minimizes the
danger of overfitting the model to multiple input parameters (the so-called
"data-snooping bias"). So the backtest performance should be much closer to
the actual forward performance.

      (Note that parameter optimization does not necessarily mean picking one
best set of parameters that give the best backtest performance. Often, it is
better to make a trading decision based on some kind of averages over different
sets of parameters.)

      Now, it is quite computationally challenging to optimize all these parame-
ters just in time for your next order, but it is often even more difficult to do that
in a backtest, given that a multidimensional optimization needs to be performed
Backtesting  55

for each historical bar. As a result, I personally have seldom traded parameter-
less models, until I get to research my regime-switching model described in
Example 7.1. That model is almost parameterless (I left out a few parameters
from optimization because of a lack of time, not because of any technical dif-
ficulties). How was I able to perform backtest parameter optimization within a
few minutes in this case? I got to use a high-end backtesting platform (Alphacet
Discovery).

*This section was adapted from my blog article "Parameterless Trading Models," which you
can find at epchan.blogspot.com/2008/05/parameterless-trading-models.html.

    The ultimate out-of-sample testing is familiar to many traders,
and it is called paper trading. Running the model on actual unseen
data is the most reliable way to test it (short of actually trading it).
Paper trading not only allows you to perform a truly honest out-
of-sample test; it often allows you to discover look-ahead errors in
your programs, as well as making you aware of various operational
issues. I will discuss paper trading in Chapter 5.

    If the strategy that you are testing comes from a published
source, and you are just conducting a backtest to verify that the re-
sults are correct, then the entire period between the time of publi-
cation and the time that you tested the strategy is a genuine out-of-
sample period. As long as you do not optimize the parameters of the
published model on the out-of-sample period, this period is as good
as paper trading the strategy.

  Example 3.6: Pair Trading of GLD and GDX

   This example will illustrate how to separate the data into a training set and a
   test set. We will backtest a pair-trading strategy and optimize its parameters
   on the training set and look at the effect on the test set.

         GLD versus GDX is a good candidate for pair trading because GLD
   reflects the spot price of gold, and GDX is a basket of gold-mining
   stocks. It makes intuitive sense that their prices should move in tandem.
   I have discussed this pair of ETFs extensively on my blog in connec-
   tion with cointegration analysis (see, e.g., epchan.blogspot.com/2006/11/
56  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

reader-suggested-possible-trading.html). Here, however, I will defer until
Chapter 7 the cointegration analysis on the training set, which demon-
strates that the spread formed by long GLD and short GDX is mean re-
verting. Instead, we will perform a regression analysis on the training set
to determine the hedge ratio between GLD and GDX, and then define entry
and exit thresholds for a pair-trading strategy. We will see how optimiz-
ing these thresholds on the training set changes the performance on the
test set. (This program is available as on epchan.com/book/example3 6.m.
The data files are available as GDX.xls and GLD.xls. This program uses
of a lag1 function will lag the time series by one time period. It is in-
cluded at epchan.com/book as well. It also uses a function "ols" for lin-
ear regression, which is part of a free package downloaded from spatial-
econometrics.com.)

Using MATLAB

% make sure previously defined variables are erased.
clear;
% read a spreadsheet named "GLD.xls" into MATLAB.
[num, txt]=xlsread(`GLD');
% the first column (starting from the second row) is
% the trading days in format mm/dd/yyyy.
tday1=txt(2:end, 1);

% convert the format into yyyymmdd.
tday1=...
datestr(datenum(tday1, `mm/dd/yyyy'), `yyyymmdd');
% convert the date strings first into cell arrays and
% then into numeric format.
tday1=str2double(cellstr(tday1));
% the last column contains the adjusted close prices.
adjcls1=num(:, end);
% read a spreadsheet named "GDX.xls" into MATLAB.
[num, txt]=xlsread(`GDX');
% the first column (starting from the second row) is
% the trading days in format mm/dd/yyyy.
tday2=txt(2:end, 1);
% convert the format into yyyymmdd.
tday2=...
datestr(datenum(tday2, `mm/dd/yyyy'), `yyyymmdd');

% convert the date strings first into cell arrays and
% then into numeric format.
tday2=str2double(cellstr(tday2));
Backtesting                                            57

% the last column contains the adjusted close prices.
adjcls2=num(:, end);

% find the intersection of the two data sets,
% and sort them in ascending order
[tday, idx1, idx2]=intersect(tday1, tday2);
cl1=adjcls1(idx1);

 cl2=adjcls2(idx2);

trainset=1:252; % define indices for training set

% define indices for test set
testset=trainset(end)+1:length(tday);
% determines the hedge ratio on the trainset
% use regression function
results=ols(cl1(trainset), cl2(trainset));
hedgeRatio=results.beta;

% spread = GLD - hedgeRatio*GDX
 spread=cl1-hedgeRatio*cl2;

plot(spread(trainset));

figure;

plot(spread(testset));

figure;

% mean of spread on trainset
spreadMean=mean(spread(trainset));
% standard deviation of spread on trainset
spreadStd=std(spread(trainset));
% z-score of spread
zscore=(spread - spreadMean)./spreadStd;
% buy spread when its value drops below 2 standard

   deviations.
longs=zscore<=-2;

% short spread when its value rises above 2 standard
   deviations.

shorts=zscore>=2;
% exit any spread position when its value is within 1
% standard deviation of its mean.
exits=abs(zscore)<=1;
% initialize positions array
positions=NaN(length(tday), 2);
58  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

% long entries
positions(shorts, :)=...
repmat([-1 1], [length(find(shorts)) 1]);
% short entries
positions(longs, :)=repmat([1 -1],

 [length(find(longs)) 1]);
% exit positions
positions(exits, :)=zeros(length(find(exits)), 2);
% ensure existing positions are carried forward

   unless there is an exit signal positions=
   fillMissingData(positions);
cl=[cl1 cl2]; % combine the 2 price series

dailyret=(cl - lag1(cl))./lag1(cl);

pnl=sum(lag1(positions).*dailyret, 2);

% the Sharpe ratio on the train-
ing set should be about 2.3
sharpeTrainset=...
sqrt(252)*mean(pnl(trainset(2:end))).

 /std(pnl(trainset(2:end)))

% the Sharpe ratio on the test set should be about 1.5
sharpeTestset=sqrt(252)*mean(pnl(testset)).
/std(pnl(testset))
plot(cumsum(pnl(testset)));
% save positions file for checking look-ahead bias.
save example3 6 positions positions;

In file lag1.m:

function y=lag1(x)
% y=lag(x)
if (isnumeric(x))

       % populate the first entry with NaN
 y=[NaN(1,size(x,2));x(1:end-1, :)];elseif (ischar(x))

       % populate the first entry with "
y=[repmat(",[1 size(x,2)]);x(1:end-1, :)];else

       error(`Can only be numeric or char array');
end

      So this pair-trading strategy has excellent Sharpe ratios on both the
training set and the test set. Therefore, this strategy can be considered free
of data-snooping bias. However, there may be room for improvement. Let's
Backtesting  59

see what happens if we change the entry thresholds to 1 standard deviation
and exit threshold to 0.5 standard deviation. In this case, the Sharpe ratio
on the training set increases to 2.9 and the Sharpe ratio on the test set
increases to 2.1. So, clearly, this set of thresholds is better.

      Often, however, optimizing the parameters on the training set may de-
crease the performance on the test set. In this situation, you should choose
a set of parameters that result in good (but may not be the best) perfor-
mance on both training and test sets.

      I have not incorporated transaction costs (which I discuss in the next
section) into this analysis. You can try to add that as an exercise. Since this
strategy doesn't trade very frequently, transaction costs do not have a big
impact on the resulting Sharpe ratio.

      To see why this strategy works, just take a look at the Figure 7.4 of the
spread, which I will discuss in connection with stationarity and cointegration
in Chapter 7. You can see that the spread behaves in a highly mean-reverting
manner. Hence, buying low and selling high over and over again works well
here.

      One last check, though, that we should perform before calling this a
success: We need to check for any look-ahead bias in the backtest program.
Add the following code fragment to the MATLAB code above after the line
"cl2=adjcls2(idx2);"

% number of most recent trading days to cut off
cutoff=60;% remove the last cutoff number of days.
tday(end-cutoff+1:end, :)=[];
cl1(end-cutoff+1:end, :)=[];
cl2(end-cutoff+1:end, :)=[];

      Add the following code fragment to the very end of the previous
MATLAB program, replacing the line "save example3 6 positions positions".

% step two of look-forward-bias check
oldoutput=load(`example3 6 positions');
oldoutput.positions(end-cutoff+1:end, :)=[];

if (any(positions=oldoutput.positions))
       fprintf(1, `Program has look-forward-bias!\n');

end

      Save this new program into file "example3 6 1.m" and run it. You
will find that the sentence "Program has look-forward-bias" is not printed
out--this indicates that our algorithm passed our test.
60  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

Sensitivity Analysis Once you have optimized your parameters
as well as various features of your model and have verified that its
performance on a test set is still reasonable, vary these parameters
or make some small qualitative changes in the features of the model
and see how the performance changes on both the training and the
test sets. If the drop is so drastic that any parameter set other than
the optimal one is unacceptable, the model most likely suffers from
data-snooping bias.

    There are some variations on your model that are particularly
important to try: the various ways to simplify the model. Do you
really need, say, five different conditions to determine whether
to make that trade? What if you eliminate the conditions one
by one--at what point does the performance on the training set
deteriorate to an unacceptable level? And more important: Is there
a corresponding decrease in performance on the test set as you
eliminate the conditions? In general, you should eliminate as many
conditions, constraints, and parameters as possible as long as
there is no significant decrease in performance in the test set, even
though it may decrease performance on the training set. (But you
should not add conditions and parameters, or adjust the parameter
values, so as to improve performance on the test set: If you do, you
have effectively used the test set as your training set and possibly
reintroduce data-snooping bias to your model.)

    When one has reduced the set of parameters and conditions that
trigger a trade to the minimum, and after one has ascertained that
small variations in these parameters and conditions do not drasti-
cally alter the out-of-sample performance, one should consider di-
viding the trading capital across the different parameter values and
sets of conditions. This averaging over parameters will further help
ensure that the actual trading performance of the model will not de-
viate too much from the backtest result.

TRANSACTION COSTS

No backtest performance is realistic without incorporating trans-
action costs. I discussed the various types of transactions costs
Backtesting  61

(commission, liquidity cost, opportunity cost, market impact, and
slippage) in Chapter 2 and have given examples of how to incorpo-
rate transaction costs into the backtest of a strategy. It should not
surprise you to find that a strategy with a high Sharpe ratio before
adding transaction costs can become very unprofitable after adding
such costs. I will illustrate this in Example 3.7.

Example 3.7: A Simple Mean-Reverting Model with and
without Transaction Costs

Here is a simple mean-reverting model that is due to Amir Khan-
dani and Andrew Lo at MIT (available at web.mit.edu/alo/www/Papers/
august07.pdf). This strategy is very simple: Buy the stocks with the worst
previous one-day returns, and short the ones with the best previous one-
day returns. Despite its utter simplicity, this strategy has had great perfor-
mance since 1995, ignoring transaction costs (it has a Sharpe ratio of 4.47
in 2006). Our objective here is to find out what would happen to its perfor-
mance in 2006 if we assume a standard 5-basis-point-per-trade transaction
cost. (A trade is defined as a buy or a short, not a round-trip transaction.)
This example strategy not only allows us to illustrate the impact of trans-
action costs, it also illustrates the power of MATLAB in backtesting a model
that trades multiple securities--in other words, a typical statistical arbitrage
model. Backtesting a model with a large number of symbols over multiple
years is often too cumbersome to perform in Excel. But even assuming that
you have MATLAB at your disposal, there is still the question of how to re-
trieve historical data for hundreds of symbols, especially survivorship-bias-
free data. Here, we will put aside the question of survivorship bias because
of the expensive nature of such data and just bear in mind that whatever
performance estimates we obtained are upper bounds on the actual perfor-
mance of the strategy.

      Whenever one wants to backtest a stock selection strategy, the first
question is always: Which universe of stocks? The typical starting point is
the S&P 500 stock universe, which is the most liquid set of stocks avail-
able. The current list of stocks in the S&P 500 is available for download at
the Standard & Poor's website (www.standardandpoors.com). Since the con-
stituents of this universe change constantly, the list that you download will
be different from mine. For ease of comparison, you can find my list saved
as epchan.com/book/SP500 20071121.xls. The easiest way to download
historical data for all these stocks is to buy a copy of the HQuote Pro soft-
ware (referenced earlier in this chapter, available from HQuote.com.) This
62                                      QUANTITATIVE TRADING

software conveniently allows you to cut and paste any list of symbols for
which you want data. Run an update on your list in the software so as to re-
trieve the data from January 1, 2000, to the present day and then export this
data to a single text file called "Export.txt," choosing only columns Date,
Open, High, Low, Close, and Volume, without header. Now, use the follow-
ing MATLAB program (epchan.com/book/retrieveHQuoteHistoricalPrice.m)
to parse this data into a form useful for our computation, and which saves
it to a binary file "SPX 20071123.mat" on your local directory:

clear;

inputFile=`Export.txt';
outputFile=`SPX 20071123';

[mysym, mytday, myop, myhi, mylo, mycl, myvol]=...
textread(inputFile, `%s %u %f %f %f %f %u', ...
`delimiter', `,');

% Since the single file consists of many symbols,
% we need to find the unique set of symbols.
stocks=unique(mysym);
% Since the single file consists of many repeating set
% of dates for different symbols, we need to find the
% unique set of dates.
tday=unique(mytday);

op=NaN(length(tday), length(stocks));
hi=NaN(length(tday), length(stocks));
lo=NaN(length(tday), length(stocks));
cl=NaN(length(tday), length(stocks));
vol=NaN(length(tday), length(stocks));

for s=1:length(stocks)
       stk=stocks{s};

       % find the locations (indices) of the data with
       % the current symbol.
idxA=strmatch(stk, mysym, `exact'); % find the
     locations (indices) of the data with
 % the current set of dates.
   [foo, idxtA, idxtB]=intersect(mytday(idxA), tday);

       % Extract the set of prices for the current symbol
Backtesting  63

 % from the downloaded data.
       op(idxtB, s)=myop(idxA(idxtA));
       hi(idxtB, s)=myhi(idxA(idxtA));
       lo(idxtB, s)=mylo(idxA(idxtA));
       cl(idxtB, s)=mycl(idxA(idxtA));
       vol(idxtB, s)=myvol(idxA(idxtA));

end

save(outputFile, `tday', `stocks', `op', `hi', ...
 `lo', `cl', `vol');

      Next, we can use this historical data set to backtest the mean-reverting
strategy without transaction cost:

clear;

startDate=20060101;
endDate=20061231;

load(`SPX 20071123', `tday', `stocks', `cl');

% daily returns
dailyret=(cl-lag1(cl))./lag1(cl);
% equal weighted market index return
marketDailyret=smartmean(dailyret, 2);
% weight of a stock is proportional to the negative
% distance to the market index.
weights=...
-(dailyret-repmat(marketDailyret,[1 size(dailyret,2)]))./
repmat(smartsum(isfinite(cl), 2), ...
[1 size(dailyret, 2)]);

% those stocks that do not have valid prices or
% daily returns are excluded.
weights(isfinite(cl) | isfinite(lag1(cl)))=0;
dailypnl=smartsum(lag1(weights).*dailyret, 2);

% remove pnl outside of our dates of interest
dailypnl(tday < startDate | tday > endDate) = [];
% Sharpe ratio should be about 0.25
sharpe=...
sqrt(252)*smartmean(dailypnl, 1)/smartstd(dailypnl, 1)

      This file was saved as epchan.com/book/example3 7.m on my web
site. Notice that the Sharpe ratio in 2006 is only 0.25, not 4.47 as stated
by the original authors. The reason for this drastically lower performance
64  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

is due to the use of the large market capitalization universe of S&P 500 in
our backtest. If you read the original paper by the authors, you will find that
most of the returns are generated by small and microcap stocks.

      In this MATLAB program, I have used three new functions: "smart-
sum," "smartmean," and "smartstd." They are very similar to the usual
"sum," "mean," and "std" functions, except they skip all the NaN entries
in the data. These functions are very useful in backtesting because price
series for stocks often starts and stops. These files are all available at
epchan.com/book.

function y = smartsum(x, dim)
%y = smartsum(x, dim)
%Sum along dimension dim, ignoring NaN.

hasData=isfinite(x);
x(hasData)=0;
y=sum(x,dim);
y(all(hasData, dim))=NaN;

"smartmean.m"

function y = smartmean(x, dim)
% y = smartmean(x, dim)
% Mean value along dimension dim, ignoring NaN.

hasData=isfinite(x);
x(hasData)=0;
y=sum(x,dim)./sum(hasData, dim);
y(all(hasData, dim))=NaN; % set y to NaN if all en-
tries are NaN's.

"smartstd.m"

function y = smartstd(x, dim)
%y = smartstd(x, dim)
% std along dimension dim, ignoring NaN and Inf

hasData=isfinite(x);
   x(hasData)=0;

y=std(x);
y(all(hasData, dim))=NaN;

      Now, continuing with our backtest, let's see what happens if we deduct
a 5-basis-point transaction cost for every trade.

% daily pnl with transaction costs deducted
onewaytcost=0.0005; % assume 5 basis points
Backtesting                                           65

% remove weights outside of our dates of interest
weights(tday < startDate | tday > endDate, :) = [];
% transaction costs are only incurred when
% the weights change
dailypnlminustcost=...
dailypnl - smartsum(abs(weights-lag1(weights)), 2).*
onewaytcost;

% Sharpe ratio should be about -3.19
sharpeminustcost=...
sqrt(252)*smartmean(dailypnlminustcost, 1)/...
smartstd(dailypnlminustcost, 1)

      The strategy is now very unprofitable!

STRATEGY REFINEMENT

If a strategy does not deliver superb backtest performance on first
trial, there are some common ways to improve it. How to refine a
strategy without introducing data-snooping bias and to remain sim-
ple with few parameters is more of an art than a science. The guid-
ing principle is the same as that of parameter optimization: What-
ever changes you make to the strategy to improve its performance
on the training set, it must also improve the performance on the
test set.

    Often, there are some very simple strategies that are fairly well
known in traders' circles and are still somewhat profitable, though
their returns seem to be diminishing. An example is the pair trad-
ing of stocks. The reason they are diminishing in returns is that too
many traders are taking advantage of this arbitrage opportunity and
gradually erasing the profit margin. However, it is often possible to
introduce minor variations in the basic strategy, which will boost its
returns.

    These minor variations are often far less well known than the
basic strategy, and therefore far less well exploited by traders.
Sometimes they involve excluding certain stocks or groups of stocks
from the universe. For example, traders often prefer to exclude
66  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

pharmaceutical stocks from their technical trading program be-
cause of the dramatic impact of news on their prices, or else they
may exclude stocks that have pending merger or acquisition deals.
Other traders change the entry and exit timing or frequency of the
trades. Yet another variation concerns the selection of the stock uni-
verse: We saw in Example 3.7 that a strategy that has a very good
Sharpe ratio when it is applied to small-cap stocks becomes very
unprofitable when applied to large-cap stocks.

    When introducing these refinements to your strategy, it is
preferable that the refinement has some basis in fundamental eco-
nomics or a well-studied market phenomenon, rather than some
arbitrary rule based on trial and error. Otherwise, data-snooping
bias looms.

Example 3.8: A Small Variation on an Existing Strategy

Let's refine the mean-reverting strategy described above in Example 3.7.
Recall that strategy has a mediocre Sharpe ratio of 0.25 and a very unprof-
itable Sharpe ratio of Ł3.19 after transaction costs in 2006. The only change
we will make here is to update the positions at the market open instead of
the close. In the MATLAB code, simply replace "cl" with "op" everywhere.

      Lo and behold, the Sharpe ratio before costs increases to 4.43, and
after costs, it increases to a profitable 0.78! I will leave it as an exercise for
the reader to improve the Sharpe ratio further by testing the strategy on
the S&P 400 mid-cap and S&P 600 small-cap universes.

SUMMARY

Backtesting is about conducting a realistic historical simulation of
the performance of a strategy. The hope is that the future perfor-
mance of the strategy will resemble its past performance, though as
your investment manager will never tire of telling you, this is by no
means guaranteed!

    There are many nuts and bolts involved in creating a realis-
tic historical backtest and in reducing the divergence of the future
Backtesting  67

performance of the strategy from its backtest performance. Issues
discussed here include:

  r Data: Split/dividend adjustments, noise in daily high/low, and
    survivorship bias.

  r Performance measurement: Annualized Sharpe ratio and maxi-
    mum drawdown.

  r Look-ahead bias: Using unobtainable future information for past
    trading decisions.

  r Data-snooping bias: Using too many parameters to fit historical
    data, and avoiding it using large enough sample, out-of-sample
    testing, and sensitivity analysis.

  r Transaction cost: Impact of transaction costs on performance.
  r Strategy refinement: Common ways to make small variations on

    the strategy to optimize performance.

    After going through this chapter and working through some of
the examples and exercises, you should have gained some hands-on
experience in how to retrieve historical data and backtest a strategy
with either Excel or MATLAB.

    When one starts testing a strategy, it may not be possible to
avoid all these pitfalls due to constraints of time and other re-
sources. In this case, it is okay to skip a few precautions to achieve
a quick sense of whether the strategy has potential and is worthy of
closer examination. Sometimes, even the most thorough and careful
backtest cannot reveal problems that would be obvious after a few
months of paper or real trading. One can always revisit each of these
issues after the model has gone live.

    Once you have backtested a strategy with reasonable perfor-
mance, you are now ready to take the next step in setting up your
trading business.
                                    CHAPTER 4

           Setting Up
        Your Business

I n this chapter, we will be taking a break from the technical as-
     pect of trading to focus on the business side of it. Assuming that
     your goal is to remain an independent trader and not work for
a money management institution, the choice of the business struc-
ture for trading is important. The main choice you have to make is
whether to open a retail brokerage account or to join a proprietary
trading firm. The next step is to determine what features of the bro-
kerage or trading firm are important to you. Finally, you have to de-
cide what kind of physical trading infrastructure you need in order
to execute your quantitative strategy.

BUSINESS STRUCTURE: RETAIL
OR PROPRIETARY?
As a trader, you can choose to be completely independent or semi-
independent. To be completely independent, you can simply open a
retail brokerage account, deposit some cash, and start trading. No
one will question your strategy, and no one will guide you in your
trading. Furthermore, your leverage is limited by Securities and Ex-
change Commission (SEC) Regulation T--roughly two times your

                                                                                              69
70  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

equity if you hold overnight positions. Naturally, all the profits and
losses will accrue to you.

    However, you can choose to join what is called a "proprietary
trading firm" such as Bright Trading, ECHOtrade, or Genesis Secu-
rities, and become a member of their firm. In order to become a
member of such firms, you have to pass the National Association of
Securities Dealers (NASD) Series 7 examination to qualify you as a
registered representative of a brokerage. You will still need to in-
vest your own capital to start an account, but you will obtain much
higher leverage (or "buying power") than is available through a re-
tail account. Depending on how much capital you invested, you may
get to keep all your profits, or some percentage of them. In terms
of liability, however, your loss is limited to your initial investment.
(Actually, liability is also limited if you form an S corporation or lim-
ited liability company [LLC] and open an account through this entity
at a retail brokerage.) Often, you can also receive training from the
firm, perhaps at an extra cost. You will also be subject to the vari-
ous rules and regulations that the proprietary trading firm chooses
to impose on its members, in addition to rules imposed by the SEC
or NASD.

    I made them sound like bad things when I spoke of rules and reg-
ulations imposed by proprietary trading firms. But, actually, some
of these rules (such as the prohibition from trading penny stocks
or the prohibition from carrying short positions overnight) are ac-
tually risk management measures for your own protection. Often,
when the going is good, traders will bemoan these constraints lim-
iting their flexibility and profitability. They may even decide to start
their own retail trading accounts and start trading on their own.
However, when they suffer the (almost inevitable) big drawdown,
they wish that someone were there to restrain their risk appetites
and come to regret this unfettered freedom. (The teenager in us has
never left after all.)

    The decision whether to go retail or to join a proprietary trad-
ing firm is generally based on your need of capital, the style of your
strategy, and your skill level. For example, if you run a low-risk,
market-neutral strategy that nevertheless requires a much higher
leverage than allowed by Regulation T in order to generate good
Setting Up Your Business  71

returns, a proprietary account may be better for you. However, if
you engage in high-frequency futures trading that does not require
too much capital, a retail account may save you a lot of costs and
hassles. Similarly, a very experienced trader with strong risk man-
agement practices and emotional stability probably doesn't need the
guidance given by a proprietary firm, but less experienced traders
may benefit from the imposed restraints.

    There is another consideration that applies to those of you who
have discovered some unique, highly profitable strategies. In this sit-
uation, you may prefer to open a retail trading account, because if
you trade through a proprietary account, your proprietary trading
firm is going to find out about your highly profitable strategy and
may "piggyback" on your strategy with a lot of its own capital. In
this case, your strategy will suffer more market impact trading cost
as time goes on.

    Table 4.1 summarizes the pros and cons for each choice.
    One final note: Some may think that there is a tax advantage
in joining a proprietary trading firm because any trading loss can
be deducted from current income instead of as capital loss. Ac-
tually, you can choose to apply for trader tax status even if you
have a retail brokerage account so that your trading loss can off-
set other income, and not just other capital gain. For details on the
tax considerations of a trading business, you can visit, for example,
www.greencompany.com.

CHOOSING A BROKERAGE OR
PROPRIETARY TRADING FIRM

Many traders use only one criterion to choose their brokerage or a
proprietary trading firm to join: the commission rate. This is clearly
an important criterion because if a trading strategy has a small re-
turn, high commissions may render it unprofitable. However, there
are other important considerations.

    Commissions actually form only part of your total transaction
costs, sometimes even a small part. The speed of execution of
your brokerage as well as their access of the so-called "dark-pool"
72                                                         QUANTITATIVE TRADING

TABLE 4.1 Retail versus Proprietary Trading

Issue                         Retail Trading               Proprietary Trading

Legal requirement to          None.                        Need to pass NASD
   open account.                                              Series 7 examination
                              Substantial.                    and satisfy other
Initial capital requirement.  Determined by SEC               NASD-imposed
Available leverage or                                         restrictions.
                                 Regulation T.
   buying power.                 Generally 2x leverage     Small.
                                 for overnight             Based on firm's
Liability to losses.             positions, and 4x for
                                 intraday positions.          discretion. Can be as
Commissions and fees.         Unlimited, unless               high as 20x or more
                                 account is opened            for intraday or hedged
Bankruptcy risk of               through an S                 positions.
   brokerage.                    corporation or LLC.
                              Low commissions              Limited to initial
Training, mentoring,             (perhaps less than 0.5       investment.
   guidance.                     cent a share) and
                                 minimal monthly fees      Higher commissions and
Disclosure of trade              for data.                    significant monthly
   secrets.                   No risk. Account                fees.
                                 insured by Securities
Restrictions on trading          Investor Protection       Has risk. Account not
   style.                        Corporation (SIPC).          insured.
                              None.
Risk management.                                           May provide such
                              Little or no risk,              services, sometimes at
                                 especially if retail         a fee.
                                 brokerage does not
                                 have proprietary          Has risk. Managers can
                                 trading unit.                easily "piggyback" on
                                                              profitable strategies.
                              No restrictions, as long
                                 as it is allowed by SEC.  May have restrictions,
                                                              such as prohibitions
                              Mostly self-imposed.            on holding overnight
                                                              short positions.

                                                           More comprehensive
                                                              and imposed by
                                                              managers.
Setting Up Your Business  73

liquidity also figures into your transaction costs. Dark-pool liquid-
ity is formed by institutional orders facilitated away from the ex-
changes, or they come from the crossing of internal brokerage cus-
tomer orders. These orders are not displayed as bid and ask quotes.
Some of the "alternative trading systems" that provide dark-pool
liquidity are Liquidnet and ITG's Posit. Your brokerage may use one
or more of these providers, it may only use its internal crossing net-
work, or it may use no alternative trading systems at all.

    Sometimes, a better execution price at a large brokerage due
to its state-of-the-art execution system and high-speed access to
deeper dark pools of liquidity will more than compensate for its
higher commissions. This kind of cost/benefit analysis cannot eas-
ily be carried out unless you actually trade on multiple brokerages
simultaneously and compare the actual execution costs.

    For example, I trade through Goldman Sachs's REDIPlus trading
platform, whose Sigma X execution engine routes orders to both its
internal crossing network as well as to external liquidity providers.
I have found that it often improves my execution price by more than
a few cents per share over execution on Interactive Brokers: more
than enough to offset its higher commissions.

    Another consideration is the range of products you can trade.
Many retail brokerages or proprietary trading firms do not allow you
to trade futures or foreign currencies. This would be a serious limi-
tation to your trading business's growth.

    Following these two fairly generic criteria, for a quantitative
trader, the next important one is: Does the trading platform offer an
application programming interface (API) so that your trading soft-
ware can receive live data feed, generate orders, and automatically
transmit the orders for execution in your account? I will discuss
more about API in Chapter 5. The only point to note here is that
without an API, high-frequency quantitative trading is impossible.

    Closely related to the availability of API is the availability of pa-
per trading accounts. If a brokerage does not offer you a paper trad-
ing account, it is very hard to test an API without risking real losses.
Among the brokerages I know that offer paper trading accounts are
Interactive Brokers, Genesis Securities, PFG Futures (for futures
trading), and Oanda (for currency trading).
