136  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

factor exposure that captures mean reversion, such as the negative
of the previous period return. If stock returns are indeed mean re-
verting, then the corresponding factor return will be positive.

    If you are interested in building a trading model based on funda-
mental factors, there are a number of vendors from whom you can
obtain historical factor data:

  r Capital IQ: www.capitaliq.com
  r Compustat: www.compustat.com
  r MSCI Barra: www.mscibarra.com
  r Northfield Information Services: www.northinfo.com
  r Quantitative Services Group: www.qsg.com

Example 7.4: Principal Component Analysis as an Example of
Factor Model

The examples of factor exposures I described above are typically economic
(e.g., interest rates), fundamental (e.g., book-to-price ratio), or technical
(e.g., previous period's return). To obtain historical values of these factor
exposures for a large portfolio of stocks so as to backtest a factor model
is usually quite expensive and not very practical to an independent trader.
(For those who are fiscally prepared to purchase such data, see the list in
the main text.) However, there is one kind of factor model that relies on
nothing more than historical returns to construct. This method is the so-
called principal component analysis (PCA).

      If we use PCA to construct the factor exposures and factor returns, we
must assume that the factor exposures are constant (time independent)
over the estimation period. (This rules out factors that represent mean re-
version or momentum, since these factor exposures depend on the prior
period returns.) More importantly, we assume that the factor returns are
uncorrelated; that is to say, their covariance matrix bbT is diagonal. If we
use the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix R RT as the columns of the
matrix X in the APT equation R = X b + u above, we will find via elementary
linear algebra that bbT is indeed diagonal; and furthermore, the eigenval-
ues of R RT are none other than the variances of the factor returns b. But
of course, there is no point to use factor analysis if the number of factors
is the same as the number of stocks--typically, we can just pick the eigen-
vectors with the top few eigenvalues to form the matrix X. The number of
eigenvectors to pick is a parameter that you can adjust to optimize your
trading model.
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  137

      In the following MATLAB program (epchan.com/book/example7 4.m),
I illustrate a possible trading strategy applying PCA to S&P 600 small-cap
stocks. It is a strategy based on the assumption that factor returns have
momentum: They remain constant from the current time period to the next.
Hence, we can buy the stocks with the highest expected returns based on
these factors, and short the ones with the lowest expected returns. You will
find that the average return of this strategy is negative, indicating that this
assumption may be quite inaccurate, or that specific returns are too large
for this strategy to work.

clear;

% use lookback days as estimation (training) period
% for determining factor exposures.
lookback=252;numFactors=5; % Use only 5 factors
% for trading strategy, long stocks with topN expected
1-day returns.
topN=50;
% test on SP600 smallcap stocks. (This MATLAB binary
% input file contains tday, stocks, op, hi, lo, cl
% arrays.)
load('IJR 20080114');
mycls=fillMissingData(cl);

positionsTable=zeros(size(cl));

% note the rows of dailyret are the observations at
% different time periods
dailyret= (mycls-lag1(mycls))/lag1(mycls);
for t=lookback+1:length(tday)

       % here the columns of R are the different
       % observations.
 R=dailyret(t-lookback+1:t,:)';
       % avoid any stocks with missing returns
hasData=find(all(isfinite(R), 2));
       R=R(hasData,:);

       avgR=smartmean(R, 2);
       % subtract mean from returns
 R=R-repmat(avgR, [1 size(R, 2)]);
       % compute covariance matrix, with observations in
       % rows.
 covR=smartcov(R');
       % X is the factor exposures matrix, B the
138  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

       % variances of factor returns. Use the
       % eigenvectors of covR as column vectors
       % for X.
       [X, B]=eig(covR);
       % Retain only numFactors
 X(:, 1:size(X, 2)-numFactors)=[];
       % b are the factor returns for time period t-1
       % to t.
 results=ols(R(:, end), X); b=results.beta;

       % Rexp is the expected return for next period
       % assuming factor returns remain constant.
 Rexp=avgR+X*b;
       [foo idxSort]=sort(Rexp, 'ascend');

       % short topN stocks with lowest expected returns
       positionsTable(t, hasData(idxSort(1:topN)))=-1;
     % buy topN stocks with highest expected returns
     positionsTable(t, ..
     hasData(idxSort(end-topN+1:end)))=1;
end

% compute daily returns of trading strategy
ret=..
smartsum(backshift(1, positionsTable).*dailyret, 2);
% compute annualized average return of
% trading strategy
avgret=smartmean(ret)*252;% A very poor return!
% avgret =
%
% -1.8099

      This program made use of a function smartcov, which computes a co-
variance matrix based on the daily return vectors of many stocks. In con-
trast to the MATLAB built-in function cov, it ignores days with no returns
(i.e., those with NaN values.)

function y = smartcov(x)
% Covariance n of finite elements.
% Rows of observations, columns of variables
% Normalizes by N, not N-1

y=NaN(size(x, 2), size(x, 2));
xc=NaN(size(x));

goodstk=find(~all(isnan(x), 1));
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading               139

xc(:, goodstk)=..
x(:, goodstk)-repmat(smartmean(x(:, goodstk),1), ..
[size(x, 1) 1]); % Remove mean

for m=1:length(goodstk)
       for n=m:length(goodstk)
              y(goodstk(m), goodstk(n))=..
                    smartmean(xc(:, goodstk(m)).*..
                  xc(:, goodstk(n)));
              y(goodstk(n), goodstk(m))=..
                  y(goodstk(m), goodstk(n));
       end

end

    How good are the performances of factor models in real trad-
ing? Naturally, it mostly depends on which factor model we are
looking at. But one can make a general observation that factor mod-
els that are dominated by fundamental and macroeconomic factors
have one major drawback--they depend on the fact that investors
persist in using the same metric to value companies. This is just an-
other way of saying that the factor returns must have momentum for
factor models to work.

    For example, even though the value (book-to-price ratio) factor
returns are usually positive, there are periods of time when investors
prefer growth stocks such as during the Internet bubble in the late
1990s, and in August and December of 2007. As The Economist
noted, one reason growth stocks were back in favor in 2007 is the
simple fact that their price premium over value stocks has narrowed
significantly (Economist, 2007b). Another reason is that as the U.S.
economy slowed, investors increasingly opted for companies that
still managed to generate increasing earnings instead of those that
were hurt by the recessionary economy.

    Therefore, it is not uncommon for factor models to experi-
ence steep drawdown during the times when investors' valuation
method shifts, even if only for a short duration. But then, this prob-
lem is common to practically any trading model that holds stocks
overnight.
140  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

WHAT IS YOUR EXIT STRATEGY?

While entry signals are very specific to each trading strategy, there
isn't usually much variety in the way exit signals are generated. They
are based on one of these:

  r A fixed holding period
  r A target price or profit cap
  r The latest entry signals
  r A stop price

    A fixed holding period is the default exit strategy for any trad-
ing strategy, whether it is a momentum model, a reversal model, or
some kind of seasonal trading strategy, which can be either momen-
tum or reversal based. (More on this later.) I said before that one of
the ways momentum is generated is the slow diffusion of informa-
tion. In this case, the process has a finite lifetime. The average value
of this finite lifetime determines the optimal holding period, which
can usually be discovered in a backtest.

    One word of caution on determining the optimal holding period
of a momentum model: As I said before, this optimal period typically
decreases due to the increasing speed of the diffusion of information
and the increasing number of traders who catch on to this trading
opportunity. Hence, a momentum model that has worked well with a
holding period equal to a week in the backtest period may work only
with a one-day holding period now. Worse, the whole strategy may
become unprofitable a year into the future. Also, using a backtest of
the trading strategy to determine holding period can be fraught with
data-snooping bias, since the number of historical trades may be
limited. Unfortunately, for a momentum strategy where the trades
are triggered by news or events, there are no other alternatives. For
a mean-reverting strategy, however, there is a more statistically ro-
bust way to determine the optimal holding period that does not de-
pend on the limited number of actual trades.

    The mean reversion of a time series can be modeled by an
equation called the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck formula (Unlenbeck, 1930).
Let's say we denote the mean-reverting spread (long market value
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  141

minus short market value) of a pair of stocks as z(t). Then we can
write

                         dz(t) = -(z(t) - µ)dt + dW

where µ is the mean value of the prices over time, and dW is sim-
ply some random Gaussian noise. Given a time series of the daily
spread values, we can easily find  (and µ) by performing a linear
regression fit of the daily change in the spread dz against the spread
itself. Mathematicians tell us that the average value of z(t) follows
an exponential decay to its mean µ, and the half-life of this expo-
nential decay is equal to ln(2)/ , which is the expected time it takes
for the spread to revert to half its initial deviation from the mean.
This half-life can be used to determine the optimal holding period
for a mean-reverting position. Since we can make use of the entire
time series to find the best estimate of , and not just on the days
where a trade was triggered, the estimate for the half-life is much
more robust than can be obtained directly from a trading model. In
Example 7.5, I demonstrate this method of estimating the half-life of
mean reversion using our favorite spread between GLD and GDX.

  Example 7.5: Calculation of the Half-Life of a Mean-Reverting
  Time Series

   We can use the mean-reverting spread between GLD and GDX in Example
   7.2 to illustrate the calculation of the half-life of its mean reversion. The
   MATLAB code is available at epchan.com/book/example7 5.m. (The first
   part of the program is the same as example7 2.m.)

  % === Insert example7 2.m in the beginning here ===

  prevz=backshift(1, z); % z at a previous time-step
  dz=z-prevz;
  dz(1)=[];
  prevz(1)=[];
  % assumes dz=theta*(z-mean(z))dt+w,
  % where w is error term
  results=ols(dz, prevz-mean(prevz));theta=results.beta;

  halflife=-log(2)/theta
142  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

% halflife =
%
% 10.0037

The program finds that the half-life for mean reversion of the GLD-GDX is
about 10 days, which is approximately how long you should expect to hold
this spread before it becomes profitable.

    If you believe that your security is mean reverting, then you also
have a ready-made target price--the mean value of the historical
prices of the security, or µ in the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck formula. This
target price can be used together with the half-life as exit signals
(exit when either criterion is met).

    Target prices can also be used in the case of momentum models
if you have a fundamental valuation model of a company. But as
fundamental valuation is at best an inexact science, target prices
are not as easily justified in momentum models as in mean-reverting
models. If it were that easy to profit using target prices based on
fundamental valuation, all investors have to do is to check out stock
analysts' reports every day to make their investment decisions.

    Suppose you are running a trading model, and you entered into
a position based on its signal. Some time later, you run this model
again. If you find that the sign of this latest signal is opposite to your
original position (e.g., the latest signal is "buy" when you have an
existing short position), then you have two choices. Either you sim-
ply use the latest signal to exit the existing position and become flat
or you can exit the existing position and then enter into an opposite
position. Either way, you have used a new, more recent entry signal
as an exit signal for your existing position. This is a common way
to generate exit signals when a trading model can be run in shorter
intervals than the optimal holding period.

    Notice that this strategy of exiting a position based on running
an entry model also tells us whether a stop-loss strategy is recom-
mended. In a momentum model, when a more recent entry signal
is opposite to an existing position, it means that the direction of
momentum has changed, and thus a loss (or more precisely, a draw-
down) in your position has been incurred. Exiting this position now
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  143

is almost akin to a stop loss. However, rather than imposing an ar-
bitrary stop-loss price and thus introducing an extra adjustable pa-
rameter, which invites data-snooping bias, exiting based on the most
recent entry signal is clearly justified based on the rationale for the
momentum model.

    Consider a parallel situation when we are running a reversal
model. If an existing position has incurred a loss, running the re-
versal model again will simply generate a new signal with the same
sign. Thus, a reversal model for entry signals will never recommend
a stop loss. (On the contrary, it can recommend a target price or
profit cap when the reversal has gone so far as to hit the opposite
entry threshold.) And, indeed, it is much more reasonable to exit
a position recommended by a mean-reversal model based on hold-
ing period or profit cap than stop loss, as a stop loss in this case
often means you are exiting at the worst possible time. (The only
exception is when you believe that you have suddenly entered into
a momentum regime because of recent news.)

SEASONAL TRADING STRATEGIES

This type of trading strategy is also called the calendar effect. Gen-
erally, these strategies recommend that you buy or sell certain secu-
rities at a fixed date of every year, and close the position at another
fixed date. These strategies have been applied to both equity and
commodity futures markets. However, from my own experience,
much of the seasonality in equity markets has weakened or even
disappeared in recent years, perhaps due to the widespread knowl-
edge of this trading opportunity, whereas some seasonal trades in
commodity futures are still profitable.

    The most famous seasonal trade in equities is called the January
effect. There are actually many versions of this trade. One ver-
sion states that small-cap stocks that had the worst returns in the
previous calendar year will have higher returns in January than
small-cap stocks that had the best returns (Singal, 2006). The ra-
tionale for this is that investors like to sell their losers in Decem-
ber to benefit from tax losses, which creates additional downward
144  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

pressure on their prices. When this pressure disappeared in Jan-
uary, the prices recovered somewhat. This strategy did not work
in 2006­07, but worked wonderfully in January 2008, which was a
spectacular month for mean-reversal strategies. (That January was
the one that saw a major trading scandal at Socie´ te´ Ge´ ne´ rale, which
indirectly may have caused the Federal Reserve to have an emer-
gency 75-basis-point rate cut before the market opened. The turmoil
slaughtered many momentum strategies, but mean-reverting strate-
gies benefited greatly from the initial severe downturn and then dra-
matic rescue by the Fed.) The codes for backtesting this January
effect strategy is given in Example 7.6.

Example 7.6: Backtesting the January Effect

Here is the MATLAB code to compute the returns of a strategy applied to
S&P 600 small-cap stocks based on the January effect. (The source codes
can be found at epchan.com/book/example7 6.m, and the input data is
also available there.)

clear;

load('IJR 20080131');
onewaytcost=0.0005; % 5bp one way transaction cost

years=..
year(cellstr(datestr(datenum(cellstr(..
num2str(tday)), 'yyyymmdd'))));
months=..
month(cellstr(datestr(datenum(cellstr(..
num2str(tday)), 'yyyymmdd'))));

nextdayyear=fwdshift(1, years);
nextdaymonth=fwdshift(1, months);

lastdayofDec=find(months==12 & nextdaymonth==1);
lastdayofJan=find(months==1 & nextdaymonth==2);

% lastdayofDec starts in 2004,
% so remove 2004 from lastdayofJan
lastdayofJan(1)=[];% Ensure each lastdayofJan date
after each
% lastdayofDec date
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  145

assert(all(tday(lastdayofJan) > tday(lastdayofDec)));
eoy=find(years=nextdayyear); % End Of Year indices

eoy(end)=[]; % last index is not End of Year

% Ensure eoy dates match lastdayofDec dates
assert(all(tday(eoy)==tday(lastdayofDec)));
annret=..
(cl(eoy(2:end),:)-cl(eoy(1:end-1),:))./..
cl(eoy(1:end-1),:); % annual returns
janret=..
(cl(lastdayofJan(2:end),:)-
cl(lastdayofDec(2:end),:))./cl(lastdayofDec(2:end),:);
% January returns

for y=1:size(annret, 1)
         % pick those stocks with valid annual returns
         hasData=..
         find(isfinite(annret(y,:)));

       % sort stocks based on prior year's returns
       [foo sortidx]=sort(annret(y, hasData), 'ascend');
       % buy stocks with lowest decile of returns,
       % and vice versa for highest decile
 topN=round(length(hasData)/10);
       % portfolio returns
     portRet=..
   (smartmean(janret(y, hasData(sortidx(1:topN))))-..
   smartmean(janret(y, hasData(..
   sortidx(end-topN+1:end)))))/2-2*onewaytcost;
     fprintf(1,'Last holding date %i: Portfolio
 return=%7.4f\n', tday(lastdayofDec(y+1)), portRet);
end
% These should be the output
% Last holding date 20051230: Portfolio return=-0.0244
% Last holding date 20061229: Portfolio return=-0.0068
% Last holding date 20071231: Portfolio return= 0.0881

This program uses a number of utility programs. The first one is the as-
sert function, which is very useful for ensuring the program is working as
expected.

function assert(pred, str)
% ASSERT Raise an error if the predicate is not true.
% assert(pred, string)

if nargin<2, str = ''; end
146  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

if pred
   s = sprintf('assertion violated: %s', str);
   error(s);

end

The second one is the fwdshift function, which works in the opposite way
to the lag1 function: It shifts the time series one step forward.

function y=fwdshift(day,x)
assert(day>=0);

y=[x(day+1:end,:,:); ..
NaN*ones(day,size(x,2), size(x, 3))];

    Another seasonal strategy in equities was proposed more
recently (Heston and Sadka, 2007; available at lcb1.uoregon.
edu/rcg/seminars/seasonal072604.pdf). This strategy is very simple:
each month, buy a number of stocks that performed the best in the
same month a year earlier, and short the same number of stocks
that performed poorest in that month a year earlier. The average
annual return before 2002 was more than 13 percent before transac-
tion costs. However, I have found that this effect has disappeared
since then, as you can check for yourself in Example 7.7. (See
the readers' comments to my blog post epchan.blogspot.com/2007/
11/seasonal-trades-in-stocks.html.)

Example 7.7: Backtesting a Year-on-Year
Seasonal Trending Strategy

Here is the MATLAB code for the year-on-year seasonal trending strategy
I quoted earlier. (The source code can be downloaded from epchan.com/
book/example7 7.m. The data is also available at that site.) Note that the
data contains survivorship bias, as it is based on the S&P 500 index on
November 23, 2007.

clear;

load('SPX 20071123', 'tday', 'stocks', 'cl');
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  147

% find the indices of the days that are at month ends.
monthEnds=find(isLastTradingDayOfMonth(tday));
monthlyRet=..
(cl(monthEnds,:)-lag1(cl(monthEnds,:)))./..
lag1(cl(monthEnds,:));

mycl=fillMissingData(cl);

% sort stocks by monthly returns in ascending order
 [monthlyRetSorted sortIndex]=sort(monthlyRet, 2);

% these are the sorted monthly returns of the
   previous year

prevYearMonthlyRetSorted=backshift(12,
monthlyRetSorted);% the sort index of the
previous year
prevYearSortIndex=backshift(12, sortIndex);
positions=zeros(size(monthlyRet));

for m=13:size(monthlyRet, 1)
       hasReturns=. . .
       isfinite(prevYearMonthlyRetSorted(m,:)) & ..
       isfinite(cl(monthEnds(m-1),:));
       mySortIndex=prevYearSortIndex(m, hasReturns);

       % take top decile of stocks as longs,
       % bottom decile as shorts
 topN=floor(length(mySortIndex)/10);
       positions(m-1, mySortIndex(1:topN))=-1;
       positions(m-1, ..

          mySortIndex(end-topN+1:end))=1;
end

ret=smartsum(lag1(positions).*monthlyRet, 2);

avgannret=12*smartmean(ret);
sharpe=sqrt(12)*smartmean(ret)/smartstd(ret);

fprintf(1, ..
 'Avg ann return=%7.4f Sharpe ratio=%7.4f\n', ..
 avgannret, sharpe);

% Output should be
% Avg ann return=-0.9167 Sharpe ratio=-0.1055

This program contains a few utility functions. The first one is LastTrading-
DayOfMonth, which returns a logical array of 1s and 0s, indicating whether
a month in a trading-date array is the last trading day of a month.
148  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

function isLastTradingDayOfMonth=..
 isLastTradingDayOfMonth(tday)

% isLastTradingDayOfMonth=
% isLastTradingDayOfMonth(tday) returns a logical
% array. True if tday(t) is last trading day of month.

tdayStr=datestr(datenum(num2str(tday), 'yyyymmdd'));

todayMonth=month(tdayStr);

tmrMonth=fwdshift(1, todayMonth); % tomorrow's month

isLastTradingDayOfMonth=false(size(tday));

isLastTradingDayOfMonth(todayMonth~=tmrMonth & ..
 isfinite(todayMonth) & isfinite(tmrMonth))=true;

Another is the backshift function, which is like the lag1 function except that
one can shift any arbitrary number of periods instead of just 1.

function y=backshift(day,x)
% y=backshift(day,x)
assert(day>=0);
y=[NaN(day,size(x,2), size(x, 3));x(1:end-day,:,:)];

You can try the most recent five years instead of the entire data period, and
you will find that the average returns are even worse.

    In contrast to equity seasonal strategies, commodity futures'
seasonal strategies are alive and well. That is perhaps because sea-
sonal demand for certain commodities is driven by "real" economic
needs rather than speculations.

    One of the most intuitive commodity seasonal trades is the
gasoline future trade: Simply buy the gasoline future contract that
expires in May near the middle of April, and sell it by the end
of April. This trade has been profitable for the last 11 years, as
of this writing in April 2008. (See the sidebar for details.) It ap-
pears that one can always depend on approaching summer driv-
ing seasons in North America to drive up gasoline futures prices in
the spring.
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading                   149

  A SEASONAL TRADE IN GASOLINE FUTURES

Whenever the summer driving season comes up, it should not surprise us that
gasoline futures prices will be rising seasonally. The only question for the trader
is: which month contract to buy, and to hold for what period? After scanning the
literature, the best trade I have found so far is one where we buy 1 contract of
RB (the unleaded gasoline futures trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange
[NYMEX]) at the close of April 13 (or the following trading day if it is a holiday),
and sell it at the close of April 25 (or the previous trading day if it is a holiday).
Historically, we would have realized a profit every year since 1995. Here is the
annual profit and loss (P&L) and maximum drawdown (measured from day 1,
the entry point) experienced by this position (the 2007­08 numbers are from
actual trading):

Year   P&L in $                              Maximum Drawdown in $

1995   1,037                                          0
1996   1,638                                 -2,226
1997
1998     227                                   -664
1999     118                                          0
2000     197
2001     735                                   -588
2002   1,562                                   -315
2003     315
2004   1,449                                          0
2005     361                                          0
2006   6,985                                     -38
2007*    890                                   -907
2008*  2,286                                     -25
       4,741                                          0
                                             -9,816
                                                      0

*Actual trading result expressed as 2 × QU.

      For those who desire less risk, you can buy the mini gasoline futures QU at
NYMEX which trade at half the size of RB, though it is illiquid.

      (This research has been inspired by the monthly seasonal trades published
by Paul Kavanaugh at PFGBest.com. You can read up on this and other seasonal
futures patterns in Fielden, 2005, or Toepke, 2004.)

    Besides demand for gasoline, natural gas demand also goes up
as summer approaches due to increasing demand from power gener-
ators to provide electricity for air conditioning. Hence, another com-
modity seasonal trade that has been profitable for 13 consecutive
150                                           QUANTITATIVE TRADING

years as of this writing is the natural gas trade: Buy the natural gas
future contract that expires in June near the end of February, and
sell it by the middle of April. (Again, see sidebar for details.)

  A SEASONAL TRADE IN
  NATURAL GAS FUTURES*

Summer season is also when natural gas demand goes up due to the increasing
demand from power generators to provide electricity for air conditioning. This
suggests a seasonal trade in natural gas where we long a June contract of NYMEX
natural gas futures (Symbol: NG) at the close of February 25 (or the following
trading day if it is a holiday), and exit this position on April 15 (or the previous
trading day if it is a holiday). This trade has been profitable for 14 consecutive
years at of this writing. Here is the annual P&L and maximum drawdown of this
trade, both in backtest and in actual trading:

     Year  P&L in $                           Maximum Drawdown in $

1995        1,970                                      0
1996        3,090                               -630
1997                                            -430
1998           450                            -1,420
1999        2,150                               -370
2000        4,340
2001        4,360                                      0
2002        2,730                             -1,650
2003        9,860
2004        2,000                                      0
2005        5,430                             -5,550
2006        2,380
2007        2,250                                      0
2008*                                           -230
               800                            -1,750
           10,137                             -7,470
                                              -1,604

*Actual trading results expressed as 4 × QG.

      Natural gas futures are notoriously volatile, and we have seen big trading
losses for hedge funds (e.g., Amaranth Advisors, loss = $6 billion) and major
banks (e.g., Bank of Montreal, loss = $450 million). Therefore, one should be
cautious if one wants to try out this trade--perhaps at reduced capital using the
mini QG futures at half the size of the full NG contract.

*This article originally appeared in my subscription area epchan.com/subscription, and is
updated with the latest numbers. You can access that area using "sharperatio" as username
and password.
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  151

    Commodity futures seasonal trades do suffer from one draw-
back despite their consistent profitability: they typically occur only
once a year; therefore, it is hard to tell whether the backtest per-
formance is a result of data-snooping bias. As usual, one way to
alleviate this problem is to try somewhat different entry and exit
dates to see if the profitability holds up. In addition, one should
consider only those trades where the seasonality makes some eco-
nomic sense. The gasoline and natural gas trades amply satisfy these
criteria.

HIGH-FREQUENCY TRADING
STRATEGIES

In general, if a high Sharpe ratio is the goal of your trading strategy
(as it should be, given what I said in Chapter 6), then you should be
trading at high frequencies, rather than holding stocks overnight.

    What are high-frequency trading strategies, and why do they
have superior Sharpe ratios? Many experts in high-frequency trading
would not regard any strategy that holds positions for more than a
few seconds as high frequency, but here I would take a more pedes-
trian approach and include any strategy that does not hold a po-
sition overnight. Many of the early high-frequency strategies were
applied to the foreign exchange market, and then later on to the fu-
tures market, because of their abundance of liquidity. In the last six
or seven years, however, with the increasing liquidity in the equity
market, the availability of historical tick database for stocks, and
mushrooming computing power, this type of strategies has become
widespread for stock trading as well.

    The reason why these strategies have Sharpe ratio is simple:
Based on the "law of large numbers," the more bets you can place,
the smaller the percent deviation from the mean return you will
experience. With high-frequency trading, one can potentially place
hundreds if not thousands of bets all in one day. Therefore, pro-
vided the strategy is sound and generates positive mean return, you
can expect the day-to-day deviation from this return to be minimal.
With this high Sharpe ratio, one can increase the leverage to a much
152  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

higher level than longer-term strategies can, and this high leverage
in turn boosts the return-on-equity of the strategy to often strato-
spheric levels.

    Of course, the law of large numbers does not explain why a
particular high-frequency strategy has positive mean return in the
first place. In fact, it is impossible to explain in general why high-
frequency strategies are often profitable, as there are as many such
strategies as there are fund managers. Some of them are mean re-
verting, while others are trend following. Some are market-neutral
pair traders, while others are long-only directional traders. In gen-
eral, though, these strategies aim to exploit tiny inefficiencies in
the market or to provide temporary liquidity needs for a small fee.
Unlike betting on macroeconomic trends or company fundamentals
where the market environment can experience upheavals during the
lifetime of a trade, such inefficiencies and need for liquidity persist
day to day, allowing consistent daily profits to be made. Further-
more, high-frequency strategies typically trade securities in mod-
est sizes. Without large positions to unwind, risk management for
high-frequency portfolios is fairly easy: "Deleveraging" can be done
very quickly in the face of losses, and certainly one can stop trad-
ing and be completely in cash when the going gets truly rough. The
worst that can happen as these strategies become more popular is a
slow death as a result of gradually diminishing returns. Sudden dras-
tic losses are not likely, nor are contagious losses across multiple
accounts.

    Though successful high-frequency strategies have such numer-
ous merits, it is not easy to backtest such strategies when the
average holding period decreases to minutes or even seconds.
Transaction costs are of paramount importance in testing such
strategies. Without incorporating transactions, the simplest strate-
gies may seem to work at high frequencies. As a consequence, just
having high-frequency data with last prices is not sufficient--data
with bid, ask, and last quotes is needed to find out the profitability
of executing on the bid versus the ask. Sometimes, we may even
need historical order book information for backtesting. Quite often,
the only true test for such strategies is to run it in real-time unless
one has an extremely sophisticated simulator.
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  153

    Backtesting is only a small part of the game in high-frequency
trading. High-speed execution may account for a large part of the ac-
tual profits or losses. Professional high-frequency trading firms have
been writing their strategies in C instead of other, more user-friendly
languages, and locating their servers next to the exchange or a ma-
jor Internet backbone to reduce the microsecond delays. So even
though the Sharpe ratio is appealing and the returns astronomical,
truly high-frequency trading is not by any means easy for an inde-
pendent trader to achieve in the beginning. But there is no reason
not to work toward this goal gradually as expertise and resources
accrue.

IS IT BETTER TO HAVE
A HIGH-LEVERAGE VERSUS
A HIGH-BETA PORTFOLIO?

In Chapter 6, I discussed the optimal leverage to apply to a port-
folio based on the Kelly formula. In the section on factor models
earlier in this chapter, I discussed the Fama-French Three-Factor
model, which suggests that return of a portfolio (or a stock) is
proportional to its beta (if we hold the market capitalization and
book value of its stocks fixed). In other words, you can increase
return on a portfolio by either increasing its leverage or increas-
ing its beta (by selecting high-beta stocks.) Both ways seem com-
monsensical. In fact, it is clear that given a low-beta portfolio and
a high-beta portfolio, it is easy to apply a higher leverage on the
low-beta portfolio so as to increase its beta to match that of the
high-beta portfolio. And assuming that the stocks of two portfo-
lios have the same average market capitalizations and book val-
ues, the average returns of the two will also be the same (ignor-
ing specific returns, which will decrease in importance as long as
we increase the number stocks in the portfolios), according to the
Fama-French model. So should we be indifferent to which portfolio
to own?

    The answer is no. Recall in Chapter 6 that the long-term com-
pounded growth rate of a portfolio, if we use the Kelly leverage,
