94  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

problems: Eliminate bugs in the strategy or execution software; re-
duce transaction costs; and simplify the strategy by eliminating pa-
rameters. But, fundamentally, your strategy still may have suffered
from data-snooping bias or regime shift.

    If you believe (and you can only believe, as you can never prove
this) that your poor live trading performance is due to bad luck and
not to data-snooping bias in your backtest nor to a regime shift, how
should you proceed when the competing demands of perseverance
and capital preservation seem to suggest opposite actions? This crit-
ical issue will be addressed in the next chapter, which discusses sys-
tematic ways to preserve capital in the face of losses and yet still be
in a position to recover once the tide turns.
                                    CHAPTER 6

       Money and Risk
         Management

A ll trading strategies suffer occasional losses, technically
         known as drawdowns. The drawdowns may last a few min-
         utes or a few years. To profit from a quantitative trading busi-
ness, it is essential to manage your risks in a way that limits your
drawdowns to a tolerable level and yet be positioned to use opti-
mal leverage of your equity to achieve maximum possible growth of
your wealth. Furthermore, if you have more than one strategy, you
will also need to find a way to optimally allocate capital among them
so as to maximize overall risk-adjusted return.

     The optimal allocation of capital and the optimal leverage to use
so as to strike the right balance between risk management and max-
imum growth is the focus of this chapter, and the central tool we
use is called the Kelly formula.

OPTIMAL CAPITAL ALLOCATION
AND LEVERAGE
Suppose you plan to trade several strategies, each with their own
expected returns and standard deviations. How should you allocate
capital among them in an optimal way? Furthermore, what should
be the overall leverage (ratio of the size of your portfolio to your

                                                                                              95
96  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

account equity)? Dr. Edward Thorp, whom I mentioned in the pref-
ace, has written an excellent expository article on this subject in one
of his papers (Thorp, 1997), and I shall follow his discussion closely
in this chapter. (Dr. Thorp's discussion is centered on a portfolio of
securities, and mine is constructed around a portfolio of strategies.
However, the mathematics are almost identical.)

    Every optimization problem begins with an objective. Our ob-
jective here is to maximize our long-term wealth--an objective that
I believe is not controversial for the individual investor. Maximiz-
ing long-term wealth is equivalent to maximizing the long-term com-
pounded growth rate g of your portfolio. Note that this objective im-
plicitly means that ruin (i.e., equity's going to zero or less because of
a loss) must be avoided. This is because if ruin can be reached with
nonzero probability at some point, the long-term wealth is surely
zero, as is the long-term growth rate.

    (In all of the discussions, I assume that we reinvest all trading
profits, and therefore it is the levered, compounded growth rate that
is of ultimate importance.)

    One approximation that I will make is that the probability dis-
tribution of the returns of each of the trading strategy i is Gaussian,
with a fixed mean mi and standard deviation si. (The returns should
be net of all financing costs; that is, they should be excess returns.)
This is a common approximation in finance, but it can be quite
inaccurate. Certain big losses in the financial markets occur with
far higher frequencies (or viewed alternatively, at far higher magni-
tudes) than Gaussian probability distributions will allow. However,
every scientific or engineering endeavor starts with the simplest
model with the crudest approximation, and finance is no excep-
tion. I will discuss the remedies to such inaccuracies later in this
chapter.

    Let's denote the optimal fractions of your equity that you should
allocate to each of your n strategies by a column vector F = ( f1,
f2, . . . , fn)T. Here, T means transpose.

    Given our optimization objective and the Gaussian assumption,
Dr. Thorp has shown that the optimal allocation is given by

                                    F  = C-1 M
Money and Risk Management  97

Here, C is the covariance matrix such that matrix element Cij is
the covariance of the returns of the ith and jth strategies, -1 indi-
cates matrix inverse, and M = (m1, m2, . . . , mn)T is the column vec-
tor of mean returns of the strategies. Note that these returns are
one-period, simple (uncompounded), unlevered returns. For exam-
ple, if the strategy is long $1 of stock A and short $1 of stock B and
made $0.10 profit in a period, m is 0.05, no matter what the equity in
the account is.

    If we assume that the strategies are all statistically independent,
the covariance matrix becomes a diagonal matrix, with the diagonal
elements equal to the variance of the individual strategies. This leads
to an especially simple formula:

                                      fi = mi/si2

This is the famous Kelly formula (for the many interesting stories
surrounding this formula, see, for example, Poundstone, 2005) as
applied to continuous finance as opposed to gambling with discrete
outcomes, and it gives the optimal leverage one should employ for a
particular trading strategy.

    Interested readers can look up a simple derivation of Kelly for-
mula at the end of this chapter in the simple one-strategy case.

Example 6.1: An Interesting Puzzle (or Why Risk Is Bad for
You)*

Here is a little puzzle that may stymie many a professional trader. Sup-
pose a certain stock exhibits a true (geometric) random walk, by which
I mean there is a 50­50 chance that the stock is going up 1 percent or
down 1 percent every minute. If you buy this stock, are you most likely--in
the long run and ignoring financing costs--to make money, lose money,
or be flat?

      Most traders will blurt out the answer "Flat!," and that is wrong. The
correct answer is that you will lose money, at the rate of 0.005 percent (or
0.5 basis point) every minute! This is because for a geometric random walk,
the average compounded rate of return is not the short-term (or one-period)
return m (0 here), but is g = m - s2/2. This follows from the general formula
for compounded growth g(f ) given in the appendix to this chapter, with the
leverage f set to 1 and risk-free rate r set to 0. This is also consistent with
98  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

the fact that the geometric mean of a set of numbers is always smaller than
the arithmetic mean (unless the numbers are identical, in which case the
two means are the same). When we assume, as I did, that the arithmetic
mean of the returns is zero, the geometric mean, which gives the average
compounded rate of return, must be negative.

      The take-away lesson here is that risk always decreases long-term
growth rate--hence the importance of risk management!

*This example was reproduced with corrections from my blog article "Maximizing
Compounded Rate of Return," which you can find at epchan.blogspot.com/2006/
10/maximizing-compounded-rate-of-return.html.

    Often, because of uncertainties in parameter estimations, and
also because return distributions are not really Gaussian, traders
prefer to cut this recommended leverage in half for safety. This is
called "half-Kelly" betting.

    If you have a retail trading account, your maximum overall lever-
age l will be restricted to either 2 or 4, depending on whether you
hold the positions overnight or just intraday. In this situation, you
would have to reduce each fi by the same factor l/(| f1| + | f2| +
· · · + | fn|), where | f1| + | f2| + · · · + | fn| is the total unrestricted
leverage of the portfolio. Here, we ignore the possibility that some of
your individual strategies may hold positions that offset each other
(such as a long and a short position each balanced with short and
long T-bills, respectively) which may allow you to hold a higher
leverage than this formula suggests.

    I stated that adopting this capital allocation and leverage will al-
low us to maximize the long-term compounded growth rate of your
equity. So what is this maximum compounded growth rate? It turns
out to be

                                    g = r + S2/2

where the S is none other than the Sharpe ratio of your portfolio! As
I mentioned in Chapter 2, the higher the Sharpe ratio of your portfo-
lio (or strategy), the higher the maximum growth rate of your equity
Money and Risk Management  99

(or wealth), provided you use the optimal leverage recommended
by the Kelly formula. Here is the simple mathematical embodiment
of this fact.

Example 6.2: Calculating the Optimal Leverage Based on the
Kelly Formula

Let's see an example of the Kelly formula at work. Suppose our portfolio
consists of just a long position in SPY, the exchange-traded fund (ETF) track-
ing the S&P 500 index. Let's suppose that the mean annual return of SPY is
11.23 percent, with an annualized standard deviation of 16.91 percent, and
that the risk-free rate is 4 percent. Hence, the portfolio has an annual mean
excess return of 7.231 percent and an annual standard deviation of 16.91
percent, giving it a Sharpe ratio of 0.4275. The optimal leverage according
to the Kelly formula is f = 0.07231/0.16912 = 2.528. (Notice one inter-
esting tidbit: The Kelly f is independent of time scale, so it actually does
not matter whether you annualize your return and standard deviation, as
opposed to Sharpe ratio which is time scale dependent.) Finally, the annu-
alized compounded, levered growth rate is 13.14 percent, which includes
the financing costs.

      You can verify these numbers yourselves by downloading the SPY daily
prices from Yahoo! Finance and computing the various quantities on a
spreadsheet. I did that on December 29, 2007, and my spreadsheet is avail-
able at epchan.com/book/example6 2.xls. In column H, I have computed
the daily returns of the (adjusted) closing prices of SPY, while in row 3760
starting at column H, I have computed the (annualized) mean return of
SPY, the standard deviation of SPY, the mean excess return of the portfo-
lio, the Sharpe ratio of the portfolio, the Kelly leverage, and, finally, the
compounded growth rate.

      The Kelly leverage of 2.528 that we computed is saying that, for this
strategy, if you have $100,000 in cash to invest, and if you really be-
lieve the expected values of your returns and standard deviations, you
should borrow money to buy $252,800 worth of SPY. Furthermore, ex-
pect an annual compounded return on your $100,000 investment to be
13.14 percent.

      For comparison, let's see what compounded growth rate we will get if
we did not leverage our investment (see the formula in the appendix to this
chapter): g = r + m- s2/2 = 0.1123 - (0.1691)2/2 = 9.8 percent. This, and
not mean annual return of 11.23 percent, is the long-term growth rate of
buying SPY with cash only.
100  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

Example 6.3: Calculating the Optimal Allocation Using
Kelly Formula

We pick three sector-specific ETFs and see how we should allocate cap-
ital among them to achieve the maximum growth rate for the portfolio.
The three ETFs are: OIH (oil service), RKH (regional bank), and RTH (re-
tail). The daily prices are downloaded from Yahoo! Finance and saved in
epchan.com/book as OIH.xls, RKH.xls, and RTH.xls. Here is the MATLAB
program (epchan.com/book/example6 3.m) to retrieve these files and cal-
culate M, C, and F *.

% make sure previously defined variables are erased.
clear;
% read a spreadsheet named "OIH.xls" into MATLAB.
[num1, txt1]=xlsread('OIH');
% the first column (starting from the second row) is
% the trading days in format mm/dd/yyyy.
tday1=txt1(2:end, 1);
tday1=datestr(datenum(tday1, 'mm/dd/yyyy'), 'yyyym-
mdd'); % convert the format into yyyymmdd.

% convert the date strings first into cell arrays
% and then into numeric format.
tday1=str2double(cellstr(tday1));
% the last column contains the adjusted close prices.
adjcls1=num1(:, end);
% read a spreadsheet named "RKH.xls" into MATLAB.
[num2, txt2]=xlsread('RKH');
% the first column (starting from the second row) is
% the trading days in format mm/dd/yyyy.
tday2=txt2(2:end, 1);
% convert the format into yyyymmdd.
tday2=..
datestr(datenum(tday2, 'mm/dd/yyyy'), 'yyyymmdd');

% convert the date strings first into cell arrays and
% then into numeric format.
tday2=str2double(cellstr(tday2));
adjcls2=num2(:, end);

% read a spreadsheet named "RTH.xls" into MATLAB.
[num3, txt3]=xlsread('RTH');
% the first column (starting from the second row) is
% the trading days in format mm/dd/yyyy.
tday3=txt3(2:end, 1);
Money and Risk Management                              101

% convert the format into yyyymmdd.
tday3=..
datestr(datenum(tday3, 'mm/dd/yyyy'), 'yyyymmdd');

% convert the date strings first into cell arrays and
% then into numeric format.
tday3=str2double(cellstr(tday3));
adjcls3=num3(:, end);

% merge these data
tday=union(tday1, tday2);
tday=union(tday, tday3);
adjcls=NaN(length(tday), 3);

[foo idx1 idx]=intersect(tday1, tday);
adjcls(idx, 1)=adjcls1(idx1);
[foo idx2 idx]=intersect(tday2, tday);
adjcls(idx, 2)=adjcls2(idx2);
[foo idx3 idx]=intersect(tday3, tday);
adjcls(idx, 3)=adjcls3(idx3);

ret=(adjcls-lag1(adjcls))./lag1(adjcls); % returns

% days where any one return is missing
baddata=find(any(isfinite(ret), 2));
% eliminate days where any one return is missing
ret(baddata,:)=[];
% excess returns: assume annualized risk free rate is 4%
excessRet=ret-repmat(0.04/252, size(ret));

% annualized mean excess returns

M=252*mean(excessRet, 1)'% M =

%

%    0.1396

% 0.0294

% -0.0073

C=252*cov(excessRet) % annualized covariance matrix

%C=

%

%    0.1109 0.0200 0.0183

%    0.0200 0.0372 0.0269

%    0.0183 0.0269 0.0420

F=inv(C)*M % Kelly optimal leverages
102                                                        QUANTITATIVE TRADING

%F=

%

%    1.2919

%    1.1723

% -1.4882

      Notice that the mean excess return of RTH is negative. Given this, it is
not surprising that the Kelly formula recommends we short RTH.

      You might wonder what the Sharpe ratio and the maximum com-
pounded growth rate generated using this optimal allocation are. It turns
out that the maximum growth rate of a multistrategy Gaussian process is

             g (F ) = r + F T C F /2

and the Sharpe ratio is given by
                                                  

                                             S = F T C F 

     Here is the MATLAB code snippet that calculates these two quantities:

% Maximum annualized compounded growth rate

g=0.04+F'*C*F/2 % g =

%

%    0.1529

S=sqrt(F'*C*F) % Sharpe ratio of portfolio

%S=

%

%    0.4751

      Notice that the compounded growth rate of the portfolio is 15.29 per-
cent, higher than that of the maximum growth rate achievable by any of
the individual stocks. (As an exercise, you can verify that the compounded
growth rate of OIH, which has the highest one-period return among the
three stocks, is 12.78 percent.)

    Note that following the Kelly formula requires you to continu-
ously adjust your capital allocation as your equity changes so that
it remains optimal. Based on the SPY example (6.2), let's say you
followed the Kelly formula and bought a portfolio worth $252,800.
The next day, disaster struck, and you lost 10 percent on the SPY.
So now your portfolio is worth only $227,520, and your equity is now
only $74,720. What should you do now? Kelly's criterion will dictate
Money and Risk Management  103

that you immediately reduce the size of your portfolio to $188,892.
Why? Because the optimal leverage of 2.528 times the current equity
of $74,720 is $188,892.

    As a practical procedure, this continuous updating of the capi-
tal allocation should occur at least once at the end of each trading
day. In addition to updating the capital allocation, one should also
periodically update F* itself by recalculating the most recent trail-
ing mean return and standard deviation. What should the lookback
period be and how often do you need to update these inputs to the
Kelly formula? These depend on the average holding period of your
strategy. If you hold your positions for only one day or so, then as a
rule of thumb, I would advise using a lookback period of six months.
Using a relatively short lookback period has the advantage of allow-
ing you to gradually reduce your exposure to strategies that have
been losing their performance. As for the frequency of update, it
should not be a burden to update F* daily once you have written a
program to do so.

    One last point: Some strategies generate a variable number of
trading signals each day, which may result in a variable number of
positions and thus total capital each day. How should the Kelly for-
mula be used to determine the capital in this case when we don't
know what it will be beforehand? One can still use the Kelly for-
mula to determine the maximum number of positions and thus the
maximum capital allowed. It is always safer to have a leverage be-
low what the Kelly formula recommends.

RISK MANAGEMENT

We saw in the previous section that the Kelly formula is not only
useful for the optimal allocation of capital and for the determination
of the optimal leverage, but also for risk management. In fact, the
SPY example (6.2) illustrated that the Kelly formula would advise
you to reduce the portfolio size in the face of trading losses. This
selling at a loss is the frequent result of risk management, whether
or not the risk management scheme is based on Kelly's formula.
104  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

    Risk management always dictates that you should reduce your
position size whenever there is a loss, even when it means realizing
those losses. (The other face of the coin is that optimal leverage dic-
tates that you should increase your position size when your strategy
generates profits.) This kind of selling is believed by some analysts
to be the cause of "financial contagion" affecting many large hedge
funds simultaneously when one faces a large loss.

    An example of this is the summer 2007 meltdown, described in
the previously cited article "What Happened to the Quants in Au-
gust 2007?" by Amir Khandani and Andrew Lo. During August 2007,
under the ominous cloud of a housing and mortgage default crisis,
a number of well-known hedge funds experienced unprecedented
losses, with Goldman Sachs's Global Alpha fund falling 22.5 per-
cent. Several billion dollars evaporated within all of one week. Even
Renaissance Technologies Corporation, arguably the most success-
ful quantitative hedge fund of all time, lost 8.7 percent in the first
half of August, though it later recovered most of it. Not only is the
magnitude of the loss astounding, but the widespread nature of it
was causing great concern in the financial community. Strangest of
all, few of these funds hold any mortgage-backed securities at all,
ostensibly the root cause of the panic. It therefore became a classic
study of financial contagion as propagated by hedge funds.

    This kind of contagion occurs because a large loss by one hedge
fund causes it to sell off some large positions that it holds (whether
or not these are the positions that cause the loss in the first place).
This selling causes the prices of the securities to drop (or rise in
the case of short positions). If other hedge funds are holding sim-
ilar positions, they will then suffer large losses also, causing their
own risk management system to sell off their own positions, and on
and on. For example, in the summer of 2007, one large hedge fund
might have been holding subprime mortgage-backed securities and
suffered a large loss in that sector. Risk management then required
that it sold off liquid stock positions in their portfolio which might,
up to that point, be unaffected by the subprime debacle. Because of
the selling of such stock positions, other statistical arbitrage hedge
funds that hold no mortgage-backed securities might now suffered
big losses, and proceeded to sell their stocks as well. Hence, a
Money and Risk Management  105

sell-off in the mortgage-backed securities market suddenly became
a sell-off in the stock market--a nice demonstration of the meaning
of contagion.

    Given the necessity of realizing losses as well as the scale and
frequency of trading required to constantly rebalance the portfolio
in order to closely follow the Kelly formula, it is understandable that
most traders prefer to trade at half-Kelly leverage. A lower leverage
implies a smaller size of the selling required for risk management.

    Sometimes, even taking the conservative half-Kelly formula may
be too aggressive, and traders may want to limit their portfolio
size further by additional constraints. This is because, as I pointed
out previously, the application of the Kelly formula to continuous
finance is premised on the assumption that return distribution is
Gaussian. (Finance is continuous in the sense that the outcomes of
making bets in the financial market fall on a continuum of profits or
losses, as opposed to a game of cards where the outcomes fall into
discrete cases.) But, of course, the returns are not really Gaussian:
large losses occur at far higher frequencies than would be predicted
by a nice bell-shaped curve. Some people refer to the true distri-
butions of returns as having "fat tails." What this means is that the
probability of an event far, far away from the mean is much higher
than allowed by the Gaussian bell curve. These highly improbable
events have been called "black swan" events by the author Nassim
Taleb (see Taleb, 2007).

    To handle extreme events that fall outside the Gaussian distri-
bution, we can use our simple backtest technique to roughly esti-
mate what the maximum one-period loss was historically. (The pe-
riod may be one week, one day, or one hour. The only criterion to
use is that you should be ready to rebalance your portfolio accord-
ing to the Kelly formula at the end of every period.) You should also
have in mind what is the maximum one-period drawdown on your
equity that you are willing to suffer. Dividing the maximum tolera-
ble one-period drawdown on equity by the maximum historical loss
will tell you whether even half-Kelly leverage is too large for your
comfort. The leverage to use is always the smaller of the half-Kelly
leverage and the maximum leverage obtained using the worst histor-
ical loss. In the S&P 500 index example in the previous section, the
106  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

maximum historical one-day loss is about 20.47 percent, which oc-
curred on October 19, 1987--"Black Monday." If you can tolerate
only a 20 percent one-day drawdown on equity, then the maxi-
mum leverage you can apply is about 1. Meanwhile, the leverage
recommended by half-Kelly is 1.26. Hence, in this case, even half-
Kelly leverage would not be conservative enough to survive Black
Monday.

    The truly scary scenario in risk management is the one that
has not occurred in history before. Echoing the philosopher Lud-
wig Wittgenstein, "Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be
silent"--on such unknowables, theoretical models are appropriately
silent.

  IS THE USE OF STOP LOSS A GOOD RISK
  MANAGEMENT PRACTICE?

Some traders believe that good risk management means imposing stop loss on
every trade; that is, if a position incurs a certain percent loss, the trader will
exit the position. It is a common fallacy to believe that imposing stop loss will
prevent the portfolio from suffering catastrophic losses. When a catastrophic
event occurs, securities prices will drop discontinuously, so the stop loss orders
to exit the positions will only be filled at prices much worse than those before
the event. So, by exiting the positions, we are actually realizing the catastrophic
loss and not avoiding it. For stop loss to be beneficial, we must believe that we
are in a momentum, or trending, regime. In other words, we must believe that
the prices will get worse within the expected lifetime of our trade. Otherwise, if
the market is mean reverting within that lifetime, we will eventually recoup our
losses if we didn't exit the position too quickly.

      Of course, it is not easy to tell whether one is in a momentum regime (when
stop loss is beneficial) or in a mean-reverting regime (when stop loss is harm-
ful). My own observation is that when the movement of prices is due to news
or other fundamental reasons (such as a company's deteriorating revenue), one
is likely to be in a momentum regime, and one should not "stand in front of
a freight train," in traders' vernacular. For example, if a fundamental analysis
of a company reveals that it is currently overvalued, its stock price will likely
gradually decrease (at least in relation to the market index) in order to reach
a new, lower equilibrium price. This movement to the lower equilibrium price
is irreversible as long as the fundamental economics of the company does not
change. However, when securities prices move drastically without any apparent
news or reasons, it is likely that the move is the result of a liquidity event--for
example, major holders of the securities suddenly need to liquidate large
Money and Risk Management  107

positions for their own idiosyncratic reasons, or major speculators suddenly
decide to cover their short positions. These liquidity events are of relatively
short durations and mean reversion to the previous price levels is likely.

      I will discuss in some more detail the appropriate exit strategies for mean-
reverting versus momentum strategies in Chapter 7.

    Beyond position risk (which is comprised of both market risk
and specific risk), there are other forms of risks to consider: model
risk, software risk, and natural disaster risk, in decreasing order of
likelihood.

    Model risk simply refers to the possibility that trading losses are
not due to the statistical vagaries of the market, but to the fact that
the trading model is wrong. It could be wrong for a large number of
reasons, some of which were detailed in Chapter 3: data-snooping
bias, survivorship bias, and so on. To eliminate all these different
biases and errors in the backtest programs, it is extremely helpful to
have a collaborator or consultant to duplicate your backtest results
independently to ensure their validity. This need to duplicate results
is routinely done in scientific research and is no less essential in
financial research.

    Model risk can also come not from any bias or error in your
model or backtesting procedure, but from increased competition
from other institutional traders all running the same strategy as
you; or it could be a result of some fundamental change in market
structure that eliminated the edge of your trading model. This is the
regime shift that I talked about in Chapter 5.

    There is not much you can do to alleviate these sources of model
risk, except to gradually lower the leverage of the model as it racks
up losses, up to the point where the leverage is zero. This can be ac-
complished in a systematic way if you constantly update the lever-
age according to the Kelly formula based on the trailing mean return
and standard deviation. (As the mean return decreases to zero in the
lookback period, your Kelly leverage will be driven to zero.) This
is preferable to abruptly shutting down a model because of a large
drawdown (see my discussion of the psychological pressure to shut
down models prematurely in the following section on psychological
preparedness).
108  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

    Software risk refers to the case where the automated trading
system that generates trades every day actually does not faith-
fully reflect your backtest model. This happens because of the om-
nipresent software bugs. I discussed the way to eliminate such soft-
ware errors in Chapter 5: you should compare the trades generated
by your automated trading system with the theoretical trades gener-
ated by your backtest system to ensure that they are the same.

    Finally, physical or natural disasters can happen, which can
cause big losses, and they don't have to be anything dramatic like
earthquakes or tsunami. What if your Internet connection went
down before you could enter a hedging position? What if your power
went down in the middle of transmitting a trade? The different meth-
ods of preventing physical disasters from causing major disruptions
to your trading can be found in the section on physical infrastruc-
ture in Chapter 4.

PSYCHOLOGICAL PREPAREDNESS

It may seem strange that a book on quantitative trading would in-
clude a section on psychological preparedness. After all, isn't quan-
titative trading supposed to liberate us from our emotions and let the
computer make all the trading decisions in a disciplined manner? If
only it were this easy: human traders who are not psychologically
prepared will often override their automated trading systems' deci-
sions, especially when there is a position or day with abnormal profit
or loss. Hence, it is critical even if we trade using quantitative strate-
gies to understand some of our own psychological weaknesses.

    Fortunately, there is a field of financial research called "behav-
ioral finance" (Thaler, 1994) that studies irrational financial decision
making. I will try to highlight a few of the common irrational behav-
iors that affect trading.

    The first behavioral bias is known variously as the endowment
effect, status quo bias, or loss aversion. The first two effects cause
some traders to hold on to a losing position for too long, because
traders (and people in general) give too much preference to the sta-
tus quo (the status quo bias), or because they demand much more
Money and Risk Management  109

to give up the stock than what they would pay to acquire it (the en-
dowment effect). As I argued in the risk management section, there
are rational reasons to hold on to a losing position (e.g., when you
expect mean-reverting behavior); however, these behavioral biases
cause traders to hold on to losing positions even when there is no
rational reason (e.g., when you expect trending behavior, and the
trend is such that your positions will lose even more). At the same
time, the loss aversion bias causes some traders to exit their prof-
itable positions too soon, even if holding longer will lead to a larger
profit on average. Why do they exit the profitable positions so soon?
Because the pain from possibly losing some of the current profits
outweighs the pleasure from gaining higher profits.

    This behavioral bias manifests itself most clearly and most dis-
astrously when one has entered a position by mistake (because of
either a software bug, an operational error, or a data problem) and
has incurred a big loss. The rational step to take is to exit the po-
sition immediately upon discovery of the error. However, traders
are often tempted to wait for mean reversion such that the loss is
smaller before they exit. Unless you have a model for mean rever-
sion that suggests now is a good time to enter into this position,
this wait for mean reversion may very well lead to bigger losses
instead.

    Another common bias that I have personally experienced is the
"representativeness bias"--people tend to put too much weight on
recent experience and underweight long-term average (Ritter, 2003).
(This reference has a good introduction to various biases studied
by behavioral finance.) After a big loss, traders--even quantitative
traders--tend to immediately modify certain parameters of their
strategies so that they would have avoided the big loss if they were
to trade this modified system. But, of course, this is unwise because
this modification may invite some other big loss that is yet to hap-
pen, or it may have eliminated many profit opportunities that ex-
isted. We must remember that we are operating in a probabilistic
regime: No system can avoid all the market vagaries that can result
in losses.

    If you feel that your system really is deficient and want to tweak
it, you should always backtest the modified version to make sure
110  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

that it does outperform the old system over a sufficiently long back-
test period, not just over the last few weeks.

    There are two major psychological weaknesses that are more
well known to the traders than to economists: despair and greed.

    Despair occurs when a trading model is in a major, prolonged
drawdown. Many traders (and their managers, investors, etc.) will
be under great pressure under this circumstance to shut down the
model completely. Other overly self-confident traders with a reck-
less bent will do the opposite: They will double their bets on their
losing models, hoping to recoup their losses eventually, if and when
the models rebound. Neither behavior is rational: if you have been
managing your capital allocation and leverage by the Kelly for-
mula, you would lower the capital allocation for the losing model
gradually.

    Greed is the more usual emotion when the model is having a
good run and is generating a lot of profits. The temptation now is to
increase its leverage quickly in order to get rich quickly. Once again,
a well-disciplined quantitative trader will keep the leverage below
the dictates of the Kelly formula as well as the caution imposed by
the possibility of fat-tail events.

    Both despair and greed can lead to overleveraging (i.e., trad-
ing an overly large portfolio): In despair, one tries to recoup the
losses by adding fresh capital; in greed, one adds capital too
quickly after initial successes with a strategy. Therefore, the one
golden rule in risk management is to keep the size of your port-
folio under control at all times. This is, however, easier said than
done. Large, well-known funds have succumbed to the tempta-
tion to overleverage and failed: Long-Term Capital Management in
2000 (Lowenstein, 2000) and Amaranth Advisors in 2006 (epchan.
blogspot.com/2006/10/highly-improbable-event.html). In the Ama-
ranth Advisors case, the leverage employed on one single strategy
(natural gas calendar spread trade) due to one single trader (Brian
Hunter) is so large that a $6 billion dollar loss was incurred, com-
fortably wiping out the fund's equity--a textbook case of risk mis-
management.

    I have experienced this pressure myself both in an institutional
setting and in a personal setting, and the unfortunate result both
Money and Risk Management  111

times was to succumb prematurely. When I was with a money man-
agement firm, I lost over $1 million for the fund's investors because,
in a fit of greed, I added over $100 million to a portfolio based on a
strategy that had been traded for barely six months. (That was be-
fore I learned of the Kelly criterion.) As if this is not enough lesson,
I repeated the same mistake again when I started trading indepen-
dently. It concerns a mean-reverting spread strategy involving XLE,
an energy exchange-traded fund (ETF) and the crude oil future (CL).
When the spread refused to mean revert over time, I stubbornly in-
creased the size of the spread to almost $500,000. Finally, despair
set in, and I exited the spread with close to a six-figure loss. Natu-
rally, the spread started to revert afterward when I wasn't around to
benefit. (Fortunately, several of my other strategies performed well
in that first year of my independent trading, so the fiscal year ended
with only a small overall loss.)

    How should we train ourselves to overcome these psychologi-
cal weaknesses and learn not to override the models manually and
to remedy trading errors correctly and expeditiously? As with most
human endeavors, the way to do this is to start with a small port-
folio and gradually gain psychological preparedness, discipline, and
confidence in your models. As you become emotionally more able
to handle the daily swings in profit and loss (P&L) and rein in the
primordial urges of the psyche, your portfolio's actual performance
will hew to the theoretically expected performance of your strategy.

    I have certainly found that to be the case after getting over those
aforementioned disastrous trades. My newfound discipline and faith
in the Kelly formula has so far prevented similar disasters from hap-
pening again.

SUMMARY

Risk management is a crucial discipline in trading. The trading world
is littered with numerous examples of giant hedge funds and invest-
ment banks laid low by enormous losses due to a single trade or in a
very short period of time. Most of these losses are due to overlever-
aging positions and not to an inherently erroneous model. Typically,
112  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

traders will not overleverage a model that has not worked very well.
It is a hitherto superbly performing model that is at the greatest risk
of huge loss due to overconfidence and overleverage. This chapter
therefore provides an important tool for risk management: the de-
termination of the optimal leverage using the Kelly formula.

    Besides the determination of the optimal leverage, the Kelly for-
mula has a very useful side benefit: It also determines the optimal
allocation of capital among different strategies, based on the covari-
ance of their returns.

    But no risk management formula or system will prevent disas-
ters if you are not psychologically prepared for the ups and downs
of trading and thus deviating from the prescriptions of rational de-
cision making (i.e., your models). The ultimate risk management
mind-set is very simple: Do not succumb to either despair or greed.
To gain practice in this psychological discipline, one must proceed
slowly with small position size, and thoroughly test various aspects
of the trading business (model, software, operational procedure,
money and risk management) before scaling up according to the
Kelly formula.

    I have found that in order to proceed slowly and cautiously, it
is helpful to have other sources of income or other businesses to
help sustain yourself either financially or emotionally (to avoid the
boredom associated with slow progress). It is indeed possible that
finding a diversion, whether income producing or not, may actually
help improve the long-term growth of your wealth.

APPENDIX: A SIMPLE DERIVATION OF
THE KELLY FORMULA WHEN RETURN
DISTRIBUTION IS GAUSSIAN

If we assume that the return distribution of a strategy (or security) is
Gaussian, then the Kelly formula can be derived very easily. We start
with the formula for a compounded, levered growth rate applicable
to a Gaussian process:

                            g( f ) = r + f m - s2 f 2/2
Money and Risk Management  113

where f is the leverage, r is the risk-free rate; m is the average sim-
ple, uncompounded one-period excess return; and s is the standard
deviation of those uncompounded returns. This formula for com-
pounded growth rate can itself be derived quite simply, but not as
simply as the Kelly formula, so I leave its derivation for the reader
to look up in the Thorp article referenced earlier.

    To find the optimal f which maximizes g, simply take its first
derivative with respect to f and set the derivative to zero:

                              dg/d f = m - s2 f = 0

    Solving this equation for f gives us f=m/s2, the Kelly formula for
one strategy or security under the Gaussian assumption.
                                    CHAPTER 7

      Special Topics in
          Quantitative
             Trading

T he first six chapters of this book covered most of the ba-
       sic knowledge needed to research, develop, and execute your
       own quantitative strategy. This chapter explains important
themes in quantitative trading in more detail. These themes form the
bases of statistical arbitrage trading, and most quantitative traders
are conversant in some if not most of these topics. They are also
very helpful in informing our intuition about trading.

     I will describe the two basic categories of trading strategies:
mean-reverting versus momentum strategies. Periods of mean-
reverting and trending behaviors are examples of what some traders
call regimes, and the switch between different regimes is a topic of
discussion here. Mean-reverting strategies derive their mathemati-
cal justification from the concepts of stationarity and cointegration
of time series, which I will cover next. Then I will describe a the-
ory that many hedge funds use to manage large portfolios and one
that has caused much turmoil in their performances: namely, factor
models. Other categories of strategies that traders frequently dis-
cuss are seasonal trading and high-frequency strategies. All trading
strategies require a way to exit their positions; I will describe the dif-
ferent logical ways to do this. Finally, I ponder the question of how
to best enhance the returns of a strategy: through higher leverage or
trading higher-beta stocks?

                                                                                            115
116  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

MEAN-REVERTING VERSUS
MOMENTUM STRATEGIES

Trading strategies can be profitable only if securities prices are
either mean-reverting or trending. Otherwise, they are random-
walking, and trading will be futile. If you believe that prices are mean
reverting and that they are currently low relative to some reference
price, you should buy now and plan to sell higher later. However, if
you believe the prices are trending and that they are currently low,
you should (short) sell now and plan to buy at an even lower price
later. The opposite is true if you believe prices are high.

    Academic research has indicated that stock prices are on av-
erage very close to random walking. However, this does not mean
that under certain special conditions, they cannot exhibit some de-
gree of mean reversion or trending behavior. Furthermore, at any
given time, stock prices can be both mean reverting and trending
depending on the time horizon you are interested in. Constructing a
trading strategy is essentially a matter of determining if the prices
under certain conditions and for a certain time horizon will be mean
reverting or trending, and what the initial reference price should be
at any given time. (When the prices are trending, they are also said
to have "momentum," and thus the corresponding trading strategy
is often called a momentum strategy.)

    Some people like to describe the phenomenon that prices can
be both mean reverting and trending at the same time as the "frac-
tal" nature of stock prices. Technical analysts or chartists like to
use the so-called Elliott wave theory to analyze such phenomena.
Still others like to use the discipline of machine learning or artifi-
cial intelligence (in particular, techniques such as hidden Markov
models, Kalman filter, neural networks, etc.) to discover whether
the prices are in a mean-reverting or trending "regime." I person-
ally have not found such general theories of mean reversion or mo-
mentum particularly useful. (See, however, the section on regime
switching, which describes an apparently successful attempt to pre-
dict regime switch for one particular stock.) Rather, I find it is usu-
ally safe to assume that, unless the expected earnings of a company
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  117

have changed, stock prices will be mean reverting. In fact, financial
researchers (Khandani and Lo, 2007) have constructed a very simple
short-term mean reversal model that is profitable (before transac-
tion costs) over many years. Of course, whether the mean reversion
is strong enough and consistent enough such that we can trade prof-
itably after factoring in transaction costs is another matter, and it is
up to you, the trader, to find those special circumstances when it is
strong and consistent.

    Though mean reversion is quite prevalent, backtesting a prof-
itable mean-reverting strategy can be quite perilous.

    Many historical financial databases contain errors in price
quotes. Any such error tends to artificially inflate the performance
of mean-reverting strategies. It is easy to see why: a mean-reverting
strategy will buy on a fictitious quote that is much lower than some
moving average and sell on the next correct quote that is in line with
the moving average and thus makes a profit. One must make sure the
data is thoroughly cleansed of such fictitious quotes before one can
completely trust your backtesting performance on a mean-reverting
strategy.

    Survivorship bias also affects the backtesting of mean-reverting
strategies disproportionately, as I discussed in Chapter 3. Stocks
that went through extreme price actions are likely to be either ac-
quired (the prices went very high) or went bankrupt (the prices
went to zeros). A mean-reverting strategy will short the former and
buy the latter, losing money in both cases. However, these stocks
may not appear at all in your historical database if it has survivor-
ship bias, thus artificially inflating your backtest performance. You
can look up Table 3.1 to find out which database has survivor-
ship bias.

    Momentum can be generated by the slow diffusion of
information--as more people become aware of certain news, more
people decide to buy or sell a stock, thereby driving the price in
the same direction. I suggested earlier that stock prices may ex-
hibit momentum when the expected earnings have changed. This
can happen when a company announces its quarterly earnings, and
investors either gradually become aware of this announcement or
118  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

they react to this change by incrementally executing a large or-
der (so as to minimize market impact). And indeed, this leads to
a momentum strategy called post earnings announcement drift, or
PEAD. (For a particularly useful article with lots of references on
this strategy, look up quantlogic.blogspot.com/2006/03/pocket-phd-
post-earning-announcment.html.) Essentially, this strategy recom-
mends that you buy a stock when its earnings exceed expectations,
and short a stock when it falls short. More generally, many news an-
nouncements have the potential of altering expectations of a stock's
future earnings, and therefore have the potential to trigger a trend-
ing period. As to what kind of news will trigger this, and how long
the trending period will last, it is again up to you to find out.

    Besides the slow diffusion of information, momentum can be
caused by the incremental execution of a large order due to the li-
quidity needs or private investment decisions of a large investor.
This cause probably accounts for more instances of short-term mo-
mentum than any other causes. With the advent of increasingly so-
phisticated execution algorithms adopted by the large brokerages, it
is, however, increasingly difficult to ascertain whether a large order
is behind the observed momentum.

    Momentum can also be generated by the herdlike behavior of in-
vestors: investors interpret the (possibly random and meaningless)
buying or selling decisions of others as the sole justifications of their
own trading decisions. As Yale economist Robert Schiller said in the
New York Times (Schiller, 2008), nobody has all the information
they need in order to make a fully informed financial decision. One
has to rely on the judgment of others. There is, however, no sure
way to discern the quality of the judgment of others. More problem-
atically, people make their financial decisions at different times, not
meeting at a town hall and reaching a consensus once and for all.
The first person who paid a high price for a house is "informing"
the others that houses are good investments, which leads another
person to make the same decision, and so on. Thus, a possibly erro-
neous decision by the first buyer is propagated as "information" to a
herd of others.

    Unfortunately, momentum regimes generated by these two
causes (private liquidity needs and herdlike behavior) have highly
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  119

unpredictable time horizons. How could you know how big an or-
der an institution needs to execute incrementally? How do you pre-
dict when the "herd" is large enough to form a stampede? Where is
the infamous tipping point? If we do not have a reliable way to es-
timate these time horizons, we cannot execute a momentum trade
profitably based on these phenomena. In a later section on regime
switch, I will examine some attempts to predict these tipping or
"turning" points.

    There is one last contrast between mean-reverting and mo-
mentum strategies that is worth pondering. What are the effects
of increasing competition from traders with the same strategies?
For mean-reverting strategies, the effect typically is the gradual
elimination of any arbitrage opportunity, and thus gradually dimin-
ishing returns down to zero. When the number of arbitrage op-
portunities has been reduced to almost zero, the mean-reverting
strategy is subject to the risk that an increasing percentage of
trading signals are actually due to fundamental changes in stocks'
valuation and thus is not going to mean revert. For momentum
strategies, the effect of competition is often the diminishing of the
time horizon over which the trend will continue. As news dissem-
inates at a faster rate and as more traders take advantage of this
trend earlier on, the equilibrium price will be reached sooner. Any
trade entered after this equilibrium price is reached will be unprof-
itable.

REGIME SWITCHING*

The concept of regimes is most basic to financial markets. What
else are "bull" and "bear" markets if not regimes? The desire to pre-
dict regime switches, which are also commonly known as turning
points, is also as old as financial markets themselves.

    If our attempts to predict the switching from a bull to a
bear market were even slightly successful, we could focus our

*This section was adapted from an article I published in Automated Trader
magazine.
120  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

discussion to this one type of switching and call it a day. If only
it were that easy. The difficulty with predicting this type of switch-
ing encourages researchers to look more broadly at other types of
regime switching in the financial markets, hoping to find some that
may be more amenable to existing statistical tools.

    I have already described two regime switches (or "shifts," for
these two examples did not switch back to their former regimes)
that are due to changes in market and regulatory structures: deci-
malization of stock prices in 2003 and the elimination of the short-
sale plus-tick rule in 2007. (See Chapter 5 for details.) These regime
shifts are preannounced by the government, so no predictions of
the shifts are necessary, though few people can predict the exact
consequences of the regulatory changes.

    Some of the other most common financial or economic regimes
studied are inflationary vs. recessionary regimes, high- vs. low-
volatility regimes, and mean-reverting vs. trending regimes. Among
these, volatility regime switching seems to be most amenable to
classical econometric tools such as the generalized autoregres-
sive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH) model (See Klaassen,
2002). That is not surprising, as there is a long history of success
among financial economists in modeling volatilities as opposed to
the underlying stock prices themselves. While such predictions of
volatility regime switches can be of great value to options traders,
they are unfortunately of no help to stock traders.

    Academic attempts to model regime switches in stock prices
generally proceed along these lines:

1. Propose that the two (or more) regimes are characterized by
   different probability distributions of the prices. In the simplest
   cases, the log of the prices of both regimes may be represented
   by normal distributions, except that they have different means
   and/or standard deviations.

2. Assume that there is some kind of transition probability among
   the regimes.

3. Determine the exact parameters that specify the regime proba-
   bility distributions and the transition probabilities by fitting the
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  121

   model to past prices, using standard statistical methods such as
   maximum likelihood estimation.

4. Based on the fitted model above, find out the expected regime
   of the next time step and, more importantly, the expected stock
   price.

    This type of approach is usually called Markov regime switch-
ing or hidden Markov models, and it is generally based on a
Bayesian probabilistic framework. Readers who are interested in
reading more about some of these approaches may peruse Nielsen
and Olesen (2000), van Norden and Schaller (1993), or Kaufmann
and Scheicher (1996).

    Despite the elegant theoretical framework, such Markov regime-
switching models are generally useless for actual trading purposes.
The reason for this weakness is that they assume constant tran-
sition probabilities among regimes at all times. In practice, this
means that at any time (as illustrated by the Nielsen and Olesen pa-
per), there is always a very small probability for the stock to tran-
sition from a normal, quiescent regime to a volatile regime. But this
is useless to traders who want to know when--and under what pre-
cise conditions--the transition probability will suddenly peak. This
question is tackled by the turning points models.

    Turning points models take a data mining approach (Chai, 2007):
Enter all possible variables that might predict a turning point or
regime switch. Variables such as current volatility; last-period re-
turn; or changes in macroeconomic numbers such as consumer con-
fidence, oil price changes, bond price changes, and so on can all
be part of this input. In fact, in a very topical article about turning
points in the real estate market by economist Robert Schiller (2007),
it was suggested that the crescendo of media chatter about impend-
ing boom or bust may actually be a good predictor of a coming turn-
ing point.

    In Example 7.1, I illustrate how we might detect turning points
using a data-mining approach with just simple technical indicators
built on stock price series as inputs while using stock returns of
multiple holding periods as outputs.
122  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

Example 7.1: Using a Machine Learning Tool to Profit from
Regime Switching in the Stock Market

As I discussed in the main text, I believe that regime switching can be most
easily discovered by using a data-mining approach: examining a massive
number of indicators to see which one might predict a switch. This is nor-
mally a very onerous task, even with MATLAB. But, luckily, a recent machine
learning program has enabled this discovery process to be done in a matter
of hours.

      I shall employ a tool here called Alphacet Discovery, which is an inte-
grated backtesting and execution platform recently launched by Alphacet,
Inc. (www.alphacet.com. Full disclosure: Alphacet is a client of my firm.)
This platform not only integrates all historical and real-time data needed
for rapid strategy prototyping, backtesting, analysis, and real-time deploy-
ment; it also contains an expanding array of machine learning programs
such as neural networks and genetic algorithms that are well suited to data
mining for the kind of relationships we are seeking.

      I will pick a prominent brokerage stock--GS--as a proxy for the finan-
cial sector. My objective is to find out if I can detect turning points in this
sector where it goes from bull to bear and back. My initial hypothesis is that
major shifts of interest rates, a release of government macroeconomic data,
or earnings announcements are likely triggers of turning points. At the time
of this writing, Alphacet had not yet completed integration of macroeco-
nomic or company news data into its database, so I will use a large percent
change in GS as proxy for such news releases. Furthermore, I believe that
whenever GS reaches an N-day high or low just before this large drop or
rise in prices occurs is a good signal that a previous regime is close to an
end. So I shall use this condition as an additional input as well.

      The search problem we face is: How large a percent change is sufficient
to trigger a regime switch? What should N be in the N-day high/low con-
dition? And how long does the new regime generally last? (In other words,
what is the optimal holding period?) To answer these questions in the old-
fashioned, manual way is very time consuming, as one has to run multi-
ple simulations with different thresholds for the independent variables and
multiple return horizons for the dependent variables. Let's see if Alphacet
Discovery can help us automate this process.

      The independent variables of the model are just the one-day returns
of GS. The dependent variables are the future returns of GS within various
holding periods. Discovery can easily find an optimal rule, or an optimal
combination of rules, which will lead to the best backtest performance. In
our case, each percent-change threshold can be encapsulated as a rule. I
entered two thresholds for buys and two for shorts: -1 percent, -3 percent,
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  123

1 percent, and 3 percent. Similarly, each holding period can be encapsulated
as a rule, too, and I entered six such periods: 1, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 60 days.

      To prepare the price, percent-change, and 10-day high/low time series
for this search is very easy: most things can be done by drag and drop,
using a mouse, in Discovery. (For simplicity, I fix N to 10 for the strategy
here, but this parameter can be optimized as well.) I just dragged a GS
price series into the strategy editor and specified a 1-day frequency with
the available controls. (The price series started around December 2006.)
See box S1 in Figure 7.1. Then I dragged several prepackaged "Rules" that
compute the 1-day percent change, and simple 10-day moving highs and
lows of a series to the strategy editor (box I2 in Figure 7.1.). And I feed
the original price series into the Program Group box by directing an arrow
from the Symbol Group box to the Program Group box.

FIGURE 7.1 Strategy Editor Showing Data and Rules Represented by Boxes

      Now I can create the entry rules by using the drop-down menus and
typing into the textboxes inside a new Rule box's editor. Figure 7.2 shows
what's inside Rule box R3 for the buy-and-sell rule based on a change of
±1 percent. I have created a similar Rule box for ±3 percent. Note that,
by default, subsequent entry signals will override positions established by
previous signals.
124  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

                                                          R3
       ­ BuySellAt0.1After10DayLowHigh

          IF

                    12-Percent-Change.3.0 >= 1
               AND

                    12-Moving-Low-10.2.0 >= TALT.NYSE.ESXXXX.GS.Last.Low
          THEN

               1
          ELSE

          IF
                    12-Percent-Change.3.0 >= -1

               AND
                    12-Moving-High-10.1.0 <= TALT.NYSE.ESXXXX.GS.Last.High

          THEN
               -1

FIGURE 7.2 Inside a Rule Box

      We can specify the holding periods using the prepackaged program
called "Holding Period" with different parameters. (In fact, you can easily
create such programs yourself if you know the programming language Lisp.)
These are all encapsulated in the box I5 (and I6 for the ±2 percent rule
separately). We feed the output of the boxes R3 to I5 by drawing an arrow,
and similarly R4 to I9.

      Finally, we run a perceptron learning algorithm on the outputs of I7 and
I9 (a perceptron is a type of neural network). This algorithm will find out the
best weights for the different rules with different holding periods (among
other parameters) based on a moving window of historical training data
with the objective of maximizing the total profit in this window. Based on
these optimized weights, the perceptron will trigger a buy-and-sell decision
at the end of each period. (Examples of other algorithms that you can select
are genetic algorithm and a K-nearest-neighbor clustering technique.)

      Interestingly, the perceptron will not force us to hold a position for
exactly N days, even though that was what the component rule was con-
structed to do so in the moving window. Every day, the strategy will decide
whether to buy, sell, or do nothing, based on the latest parameter optimiza-
tion using the latest data in the moving window and the resulting linearly
weighted decisions from the different rules.
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  125

      Now we are ready to look at the performance results of this strategy.
We can bring up Discovery's charting application for this. In Figure 7.3, I
have shown three of the best equity curves that come from the perceptron
optimization. The best curve belongs to a model using a 50-day moving
window for the optimization. (The length of the moving window can itself
be an object of optimization, but we will skip that step here.) On the side-
bar of the charting application, we can see that this strategy has a 37.93
percent gross cumulative return over a six-month backtest period, with 89
round-trip trades. (This is to be compared with a 15.77 percent return of a
buy-and-hold strategy on GS, with a 14 percent drawdown.) We have also
shown the best equity curve from the various holding period routines to
quantify the improvement from optimization (holding period of 10 days in
I5 on the 1 percent rule at R3), which has a gross cumulative return of 18.55
percent over the period.

      Though the backtest period is short, this return looks very impressive.
Can something be wrong? In particular, what about the much-feared data-
snooping bias that seems to creep into every strategy that is based on ma-
chine learning or artificial intelligence? The basic philosophy of Alphacet

FIGURE 7.3 Charting Application Showing Equity Curves and Performance
Statistics in the Sidebar
126  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

Discovery is to prevent this kind of bias from happening. In theory, though
not in our particular illustration here, optimization over all rules and all
parameters can be done in a backward-looking moving window, so that we
are using absolutely no unseen future data for the backtest. Of course, data-
snooping bias can still creep in because we can abandon a whole category
of models when the performance is poor and try one new category after
another until it improves. But then, this is unavoidable whenever we are in
the business of backtesting.

      One should also note that the parameters that the search engine is
allowed to optimize over in this case are actually quite limited: They are
just the different holding periods. This further reduces the danger of data-
snooping bias.

      Since the backtest looks good, I can immediately press a single button
and have this strategy run against real-time data and generate orders in
either a paper or a real trading account.

      As you can see, it may not be hard to create a regime-switching model
with the simplest of technical indicators as long as one is able to effi-
ciently optimize over a large number of parameters, conducted strictly
in a backward-looking moving window. (See my sidebar on "Parameter-
less Trading Models" in Chapter 3.) The performance may even be bet-
ter if we can confirm the price moves with macroeconomic or company-
specific news. I believe that this same technique can be applied profitably
to many exchange-traded funds (ETFs), futures, or even currency trading
as well.

I would like to thank Rosario Ingargiola, chief technology officer of Alphacet, Inc., for
his help in using Alphacet Discovery to develop the strategy shown here.

STATIONARITY AND COINTEGRATION

A time series is "stationary" if it never drifts farther and farther away
from its initial value. In technical terms, stationary time series are
"integrated of order zero," or I(0). (See Alexander, 2001.) It is obvi-
ous that if the price series of a security is stationary, it would be a
great candidate for a mean-reversion strategy. Unfortunately, most
stock price series are not stationary--they exhibit a geometric ran-
dom walk that gets them farther and farther away from their start-
ing (i.e., initial public offering) values. However, you can often find
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading                                       127

a pair of stocks such that if you long one and short the other, the
market value of the pair is stationary. If this is the case, then the
two individual time series are said to be cointegrated. They are so
described because a linear combination of them is integrated of or-
der zero. Typically, two stocks that form a cointegrating pair are
from the same industry group. Traders have long been familiar with
this so-called pair-trading strategy. They buy the pair portfolio when
the spread of the stock prices formed by these pairs is low, and
sell/short the pair when the spread is high--in other words, a classic
mean-reverting strategy.

    An example of a pair of cointegrating price series is the gold
ETF GLD versus the gold miners ETF, GDX, which I discussed
in Example 3.6. If we form a portfolio with long 1 share of GLD
and short 1.6766 share of GDX, the prices of the portfolio form a
stationary time series (see Figure 7.4). The exact number of shares
of GLD and GDX can be determined by a regression fit of the two
component time series (see Example 7.2).

                                       Spread between GLD and GDX
               10

               8   Long 1 share of GLD
                   Short 1.6766 share of GDX

               6

Spread (in $)  4

               2

               0

               -2

               -4

 -6                20061012  20070309 20070801                     20071221
20060523                            Date

FIGURE 7.4 A Stationary Time Series Formed by the Spread between GLD and
GDX
128  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

Example 7.2: How to Form a Good Cointegrating
(and Mean-Reverting) Pair of Stocks

As I explained in the main text, if you long one security and short
another one in the same industry group and in the right proportion,
sometimes the combination (or "spread") becomes a stationary series.
A stationary series is an excellent candidate for a mean-reverting strat-
egy. This example teaches you how to use a free MATLAB package
downloadable at www.spatial-econometrics.com to determine if two price
series are cointegrated and, if so, how to find the optimal "hedge ratio" (i.e.,
the number of shares of the second security versus one share of the first
security).

      The main method used to test for cointegration is called the cointegrat-
ing augmented Dickey-Fuller test, hence the function name cadf. A detailed
description of this method can be found in the manual also available on the
same web site mentioned earlier.

      The following program is available online as epchan.com/book/ exam-
ple7 2.m:

% make sure previously defined variables are erased.
clear;
% read a spreadsheet named "GLD.xls" into MATLAB.
[num, txt]=xlsread('GLD');

% the first column (starting from the second row) is
% the trading days in format mm/dd/yyyy.
tday1=txt(2:end, 1);
% convert the format into yyyymmdd.
tday1=..
datestr(datenum(tday1, 'mm/dd/yyyy'), 'yyyymmdd');

% convert the date strings first into cell arrays and
% then into numeric format.
tday1=str2double(cellstr(tday1));
% the last column contains the adjusted close prices.
adjcls1=num(:, end);
% read a spreadsheet named "GDX.xls" into MATLAB.
[num2, txt2]=xlsread('GDX');
% the first column (starting from the second row) is
% the trading days in format mm/dd/yyyy.
tday2=txt2(2:end, 1);
% convert the format into yyyymmdd.
tday2=..
datestr(datenum(tday2, 'mm/dd/yyyy'), 'yyyymmdd');
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading                     129

% convert the date strings first into cell arrays and
% then into numeric format.
tday2=str2double(cellstr(tday2));
adjcls2=num2(:, end);

% find all the days when either GLD or GDX has data.
tday=union(tday1, tday2);
[foo idx idx1]=intersect(tday, tday1);

% combining the two price series
adjcls=NaN(length(tday), 2);
adjcls(idx, 1)=adjcls1(idx1);

[foo idx idx2]=intersect(tday, tday2);

adjcls(idx, 2)=adjcls2(idx2);

% days where any one price is missing
baddata=find(any(~isfinite(adjcls), 2));
tday(baddata)=[];

adjcls(baddata,:)=[];

vnames=strvcat('GLD', 'GDX');

% run cointegration check using
% augmented Dickey-Fuller test
res=cadf(adjcls(:, 1), adjcls(:, 2), 0, 1);
prt(res, vnames);

% Output from cadf function:

% Augmented DF test for co-integration variables:

   GLD,GDX

% CADF t-statistic     # of lags AR(1) estimate

%  -3.35698533                          1       -0.060892

%

% 1% Crit Value 5% Crit Value 10% Crit Value

%           -3.819                      -3.343  -3.042

% The t-statistic of -3.36 which is in between the
% 1% Crit Value of -3.819
% and the 5% Crit Value of -3.343 means that
% there is a better than 95%
% probability that these 2 time series are
% cointegrated.
130                                                    QUANTITATIVE TRADING

  results=ols(adjcls(:, 1), adjcls(:, 2));

  hedgeRatio=results.beta
  z=results.resid;

  % A hedgeRatio of 1.6766 was found.
  % I.e. GLD=1.6766*GDX + z, where z can be
  % interpreted as the
  % spread GLD-1.6766*GDX and should be stationary.

  % This should produce a chart similar to Figure 7.4.
  plot(z);

    In case you think that any two stocks in the same industry group
would be cointegrating, here is a counterexample: KO (Coca-Cola)
versus PEP (Pepsi). The same cointegration test as used in Example
7.1 tells us that there is a less than 90 percent probability that they
are cointegrated. (You should try it yourself and then compare with
my program epchan.com/book/example7 3.m.) If you use linear re-
gression to find the best fit between KO and PEP, the plot of the time
series will resemble Figure 7.5.

                    50

                    40   Long 1 share of KO

                         Short 1.01 share of PEP

                    30

     Spread (in $)  20

                    10

                    0

                    -10

                    -20

                    -30       19841128       19921027  20000927
                    19770103                    Date

FIGURE 7.5 A Nonstationary Time Series Formed by the Spread between KO and
PEP
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  131

    If a price series (of a stock, a pair of stocks, or, in general, a port-
folio of stocks) is stationary, then a mean-reverting strategy is guar-
anteed to be profitable, as long as the stationarity persists into the
future (which is by no means guaranteed). However, the converse is
not true. You don't necessarily need a stationary price series in order
to have a successful mean-reverting strategy. Even a nonstationary
price series can have many short-term reversal opportunities that
one can exploit, as many traders have discovered.

    Many pair traders are unfamiliar with the concepts of station-
arity and cointegration. But most of them are familiar with correla-
tion, which superficially seems to mean the same thing as cointe-
gration. Actually, they are quite different. Correlation between two
price series actually refers to the correlations of their returns over
some time horizon (for concreteness, let's say a day). If two stocks
are positively correlated, there is a good chance that their prices
will move in the same direction most days. However, having a posi-
tive correlation does not say anything about the long-term behavior
of the two stocks. In particular, it doesn't guarantee that the stock
prices will not grow farther and farther apart in the long run even
if they do move in the same direction most days. However, if two
stocks were cointegrated and remain so in the future, their prices
(weighted appropriately) will be unlikely to diverge. Yet their daily
(or weekly, or any other time horizon) returns may be quite uncor-
related.

    As an artificial example of two stocks, A and B, that are coin-
tegrated but not correlated, see Figure 7.6. Stock B clearly doesn't
move in any correlated fashion with stock A: Some days they move
in the same direction, other days the opposite. Most days, stock B
doesn't move at all. But notice that the spread in stock prices be-
tween A and B always returns to about $1 after a while.

    Can we find real-life example of this phenomenon? Well, KO
versus PEP is one. In the program example7 3.m I have shown
that they do not cointegrate. If, however, you test their daily re-
turns for correlation, you will find that their correlation of 0.4849
is indeed statistically significant. The correlation test is presented
at the end of the example7 3.m program and shown here in
Example 7.3.
132                                                    QUANTITATIVE TRADING

              73

                                         Stock A

              72                         Stock B

              71

              70

Daily Prices  69

              68

              67

              66

              65

              64

              63  0  5       10  15  20        25  30  35        40                           45

                                         Days

FIGURE 7.6 Cointegration Is Not Correlation. Stocks A and B are cointegrated but
not correlated

Example 7.3: Testing the Cointegration versus Correlation
Properties between KO and PEP

              The cointegration test for KO and PEP is the same as that for GDX and
              GLD in Example 7.2, so it won't be repeated here. (It is available from
              epchan.com/book/example7 3.m) The cointegration result shows that the
              t-statistic for the augmented Dicky-Fuller test is -2.14, larger than the 10
              percent critical value of -3.038, meaning that there is a less than 90 percent
              probability that these two time series are cointegrated.

                    The following code fragment, however, tests for correlation between
              the two time series:

              % A test for correlation.
              dailyReturns=(adjcls-lag1(adjcls))./lag1(adjcls);
              [R,P]=corrcoef(dailyReturns(2:end,:));

              %R=

              %

              %      1.0000  0.4849
                             1.0000
              %      0.4849
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading                 133

%

%

%P=

%

%    1  0

%    0  1

% The P value of 0 indicates that the two time series
% are significantly correlated.

    Stationarity is not limited to the spread between stocks: it can
also be found in certain currency rates. For example, the Cana-
dian dollar/Australian dollar (CAD/AUD) cross-currency rate is quite
stationary, both being commodities currencies. Numerous pairs of
futures as well as well as fixed-income instruments can be found
to be cointegrating as well. (The simplest examples of cointegrat-
ing futures pairs are calendar spreads: long and short futures con-
tracts of the same underlying commodity but different expiration
months. Similarly for fixed-income instruments, one can long and
short bonds by the same issuer but of different maturities.)

FACTOR MODELS

Financial commentators often say something like this: "The current
market favors value stocks," "The market is focusing on earnings
growth," or "Investors are paying attention to inflation numbers."
How do we quantify these and other common drivers of returns?

    There is a well-known framework in quantitative finance called
factor models (also known as arbitrage pricing theory [APT]) that
attempts to capture the different drivers of returns such as earnings
growth rates, interest rate, or the market capitalization of a com-
pany. These drivers are called factors. Mathematically, we can write
the excess returns (returns minus risk-free rate) R of N stocks as

                                     R = Xb + u
134  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

where X is an N × N matrix of factor exposures (also known as
factor loadings), b is an N vector of factor returns, and u an N vector
of specific returns. (Every one of these quantities is time dependent,
but I suppress this explicit dependence for simplicity.)

    The terms factor exposure, factor return, and specific return
are commonly used in quantitative finance, and it is well worth our
effort to understand their meanings. Factor returns are the com-
mon drivers of stock returns, and are therefore independent of a
particular stock. Factor exposures are the sensitivities to each of
these common drivers. Any part of a stock's return that cannot be
explained by these common factor returns is deemed a specific re-
turn (i.e., specific to a stock and essentially regarded as just random
noise within the APT framework). Each stock's specific return is as-
sumed to be uncorrelated to another stock's.

    Let's illustrate these using a simple factor model called the
Fama-French Three-Factor model (Fama and French, 1992). This
model postulates that the excess return of a stock depends linearly
on only three factor exposures: its beta (i.e., its sensitivity to the
market index), its market capitalization, and its book-to-price ratio.
These factor exposures are obviously different for each stock and
for each time period. (Factor exposures are often normalized such
that the average of the factor exposures within a universe of stocks
is zero, and the standard deviation is 1.)

    Now that we know how to calculate the factor exposures, what
about the factor returns and specific returns? We cannot directly
compute the factor returns and specific returns--we have to infer
their values by running a multivariate linear regression of the excess
returns of stocks against the factor exposures. Note that each stock
represents one data point in this linear regression, and we have to
either run a separate linear regression for each time period or, if
we want an average value over many time periods, aggregate the
values from all these time periods into one training set and run one
regression against them all.

    If you perform this linear regression fit over many time peri-
ods for the Fama-French Three-Factor model, you will find that
the market capitalization factor return is usually negative (meaning
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  135

that small-cap stocks usually outperform large-cap stocks), and the
book-to-price ratio factor return is usually positive (meaning value
stocks usually outperform growth stocks). And since most stocks
are positively correlated with the market index, the beta factor re-
turn is positive as well.

    The Fama-French model has no monopoly on the choice of
factors. In fact, you can construct as many factors as creativity
and rationality allow. For example, you can choose return on eq-
uity as a factor exposure, or the correlation of the stock return
with the prime rate as another. You can choose any number of
other economic, fundamental, or technical factors. Whether the
factor exposures you have chosen are sensible or not will deter-
mine whether the factor model explains the excess returns of the
stocks adequately. If the factor exposures (and consequently the
model as a whole) are poorly chosen, the linear regression fit will
produce specific returns of significant sizes, and the R2 statistic
of the fit will be small. According to experts (Grinold and Kahn,
1999), the R2 statistic of a good factor model with monthly re-
turns of 1,000 stocks and 50 factors is typically about 30 percent to
40 percent.

    It may appear that these factor models are only explanatory in
retrospect--that is, given historical returns and factor exposures,
we can compute the factor returns of those historical periods. But
what good are those historical factor returns for our trading? It turns
out that often factor returns are more stable than individual stock
returns. In other words, they have momentum. You can therefore
assume that their values remain unchanged from the current period
(known from the regression fit) to the next time period. If this is
the case, then, of course, you can also predict the excess returns,
as long as the factor exposures are well chosen and therefore the
time-varying specific returns are not significant.

    Let me clarify one point of potential confusion. Even though
I stated that factor models can be useful as a predictive model
(and therefore for trading) only if we assume the factor returns
have momentum, it does not mean that factor models cannot cap-
ture mean reversion of stock returns. You can, in fact, construct a
136  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

factor exposure that captures mean reversion, such as the negative
of the previous period return. If stock returns are indeed mean re-
verting, then the corresponding factor return will be positive.

    If you are interested in building a trading model based on funda-
mental factors, there are a number of vendors from whom you can
obtain historical factor data:

  r Capital IQ: www.capitaliq.com
  r Compustat: www.compustat.com
  r MSCI Barra: www.mscibarra.com
  r Northfield Information Services: www.northinfo.com
  r Quantitative Services Group: www.qsg.com

Example 7.4: Principal Component Analysis as an Example of
Factor Model

The examples of factor exposures I described above are typically economic
(e.g., interest rates), fundamental (e.g., book-to-price ratio), or technical
(e.g., previous period's return). To obtain historical values of these factor
exposures for a large portfolio of stocks so as to backtest a factor model
is usually quite expensive and not very practical to an independent trader.
(For those who are fiscally prepared to purchase such data, see the list in
the main text.) However, there is one kind of factor model that relies on
nothing more than historical returns to construct. This method is the so-
called principal component analysis (PCA).

      If we use PCA to construct the factor exposures and factor returns, we
must assume that the factor exposures are constant (time independent)
over the estimation period. (This rules out factors that represent mean re-
version or momentum, since these factor exposures depend on the prior
period returns.) More importantly, we assume that the factor returns are
uncorrelated; that is to say, their covariance matrix bbT is diagonal. If we
use the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix R RT as the columns of the
matrix X in the APT equation R = X b + u above, we will find via elementary
linear algebra that bbT is indeed diagonal; and furthermore, the eigenval-
ues of R RT are none other than the variances of the factor returns b. But
of course, there is no point to use factor analysis if the number of factors
is the same as the number of stocks--typically, we can just pick the eigen-
vectors with the top few eigenvalues to form the matrix X. The number of
eigenvectors to pick is a parameter that you can adjust to optimize your
trading model.
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  137

      In the following MATLAB program (epchan.com/book/example7 4.m),
I illustrate a possible trading strategy applying PCA to S&P 600 small-cap
stocks. It is a strategy based on the assumption that factor returns have
momentum: They remain constant from the current time period to the next.
Hence, we can buy the stocks with the highest expected returns based on
these factors, and short the ones with the lowest expected returns. You will
find that the average return of this strategy is negative, indicating that this
assumption may be quite inaccurate, or that specific returns are too large
for this strategy to work.

clear;

% use lookback days as estimation (training) period
% for determining factor exposures.
lookback=252;numFactors=5; % Use only 5 factors
% for trading strategy, long stocks with topN expected
1-day returns.
topN=50;
% test on SP600 smallcap stocks. (This MATLAB binary
% input file contains tday, stocks, op, hi, lo, cl
% arrays.)
load('IJR 20080114');
mycls=fillMissingData(cl);

positionsTable=zeros(size(cl));

% note the rows of dailyret are the observations at
% different time periods
dailyret= (mycls-lag1(mycls))/lag1(mycls);
for t=lookback+1:length(tday)

       % here the columns of R are the different
       % observations.
 R=dailyret(t-lookback+1:t,:)';
       % avoid any stocks with missing returns
hasData=find(all(isfinite(R), 2));
       R=R(hasData,:);

       avgR=smartmean(R, 2);
       % subtract mean from returns
 R=R-repmat(avgR, [1 size(R, 2)]);
       % compute covariance matrix, with observations in
       % rows.
 covR=smartcov(R');
       % X is the factor exposures matrix, B the
138  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

       % variances of factor returns. Use the
       % eigenvectors of covR as column vectors
       % for X.
       [X, B]=eig(covR);
       % Retain only numFactors
 X(:, 1:size(X, 2)-numFactors)=[];
       % b are the factor returns for time period t-1
       % to t.
 results=ols(R(:, end), X); b=results.beta;

       % Rexp is the expected return for next period
       % assuming factor returns remain constant.
 Rexp=avgR+X*b;
       [foo idxSort]=sort(Rexp, 'ascend');

       % short topN stocks with lowest expected returns
       positionsTable(t, hasData(idxSort(1:topN)))=-1;
     % buy topN stocks with highest expected returns
     positionsTable(t, ..
     hasData(idxSort(end-topN+1:end)))=1;
end

% compute daily returns of trading strategy
ret=..
smartsum(backshift(1, positionsTable).*dailyret, 2);
% compute annualized average return of
% trading strategy
avgret=smartmean(ret)*252;% A very poor return!
% avgret =
%
% -1.8099

      This program made use of a function smartcov, which computes a co-
variance matrix based on the daily return vectors of many stocks. In con-
trast to the MATLAB built-in function cov, it ignores days with no returns
(i.e., those with NaN values.)

function y = smartcov(x)
% Covariance n of finite elements.
% Rows of observations, columns of variables
% Normalizes by N, not N-1

y=NaN(size(x, 2), size(x, 2));
xc=NaN(size(x));

goodstk=find(~all(isnan(x), 1));
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading               139

xc(:, goodstk)=..
x(:, goodstk)-repmat(smartmean(x(:, goodstk),1), ..
[size(x, 1) 1]); % Remove mean

for m=1:length(goodstk)
       for n=m:length(goodstk)
              y(goodstk(m), goodstk(n))=..
                    smartmean(xc(:, goodstk(m)).*..
                  xc(:, goodstk(n)));
              y(goodstk(n), goodstk(m))=..
                  y(goodstk(m), goodstk(n));
       end

end

    How good are the performances of factor models in real trad-
ing? Naturally, it mostly depends on which factor model we are
looking at. But one can make a general observation that factor mod-
els that are dominated by fundamental and macroeconomic factors
have one major drawback--they depend on the fact that investors
persist in using the same metric to value companies. This is just an-
other way of saying that the factor returns must have momentum for
factor models to work.

    For example, even though the value (book-to-price ratio) factor
returns are usually positive, there are periods of time when investors
prefer growth stocks such as during the Internet bubble in the late
1990s, and in August and December of 2007. As The Economist
noted, one reason growth stocks were back in favor in 2007 is the
simple fact that their price premium over value stocks has narrowed
significantly (Economist, 2007b). Another reason is that as the U.S.
economy slowed, investors increasingly opted for companies that
still managed to generate increasing earnings instead of those that
were hurt by the recessionary economy.

    Therefore, it is not uncommon for factor models to experi-
ence steep drawdown during the times when investors' valuation
method shifts, even if only for a short duration. But then, this prob-
lem is common to practically any trading model that holds stocks
overnight.
140  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

WHAT IS YOUR EXIT STRATEGY?

While entry signals are very specific to each trading strategy, there
isn't usually much variety in the way exit signals are generated. They
are based on one of these:

  r A fixed holding period
  r A target price or profit cap
  r The latest entry signals
  r A stop price

    A fixed holding period is the default exit strategy for any trad-
ing strategy, whether it is a momentum model, a reversal model, or
some kind of seasonal trading strategy, which can be either momen-
tum or reversal based. (More on this later.) I said before that one of
the ways momentum is generated is the slow diffusion of informa-
tion. In this case, the process has a finite lifetime. The average value
of this finite lifetime determines the optimal holding period, which
can usually be discovered in a backtest.

    One word of caution on determining the optimal holding period
of a momentum model: As I said before, this optimal period typically
decreases due to the increasing speed of the diffusion of information
and the increasing number of traders who catch on to this trading
opportunity. Hence, a momentum model that has worked well with a
holding period equal to a week in the backtest period may work only
with a one-day holding period now. Worse, the whole strategy may
become unprofitable a year into the future. Also, using a backtest of
the trading strategy to determine holding period can be fraught with
data-snooping bias, since the number of historical trades may be
limited. Unfortunately, for a momentum strategy where the trades
are triggered by news or events, there are no other alternatives. For
a mean-reverting strategy, however, there is a more statistically ro-
bust way to determine the optimal holding period that does not de-
pend on the limited number of actual trades.

    The mean reversion of a time series can be modeled by an
equation called the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck formula (Unlenbeck, 1930).
Let's say we denote the mean-reverting spread (long market value
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  141

minus short market value) of a pair of stocks as z(t). Then we can
write

                         dz(t) = -(z(t) - µ)dt + dW

where µ is the mean value of the prices over time, and dW is sim-
ply some random Gaussian noise. Given a time series of the daily
spread values, we can easily find  (and µ) by performing a linear
regression fit of the daily change in the spread dz against the spread
itself. Mathematicians tell us that the average value of z(t) follows
an exponential decay to its mean µ, and the half-life of this expo-
nential decay is equal to ln(2)/ , which is the expected time it takes
for the spread to revert to half its initial deviation from the mean.
This half-life can be used to determine the optimal holding period
for a mean-reverting position. Since we can make use of the entire
time series to find the best estimate of , and not just on the days
where a trade was triggered, the estimate for the half-life is much
more robust than can be obtained directly from a trading model. In
Example 7.5, I demonstrate this method of estimating the half-life of
mean reversion using our favorite spread between GLD and GDX.

  Example 7.5: Calculation of the Half-Life of a Mean-Reverting
  Time Series

   We can use the mean-reverting spread between GLD and GDX in Example
   7.2 to illustrate the calculation of the half-life of its mean reversion. The
   MATLAB code is available at epchan.com/book/example7 5.m. (The first
   part of the program is the same as example7 2.m.)

  % === Insert example7 2.m in the beginning here ===

  prevz=backshift(1, z); % z at a previous time-step
  dz=z-prevz;
  dz(1)=[];
  prevz(1)=[];
  % assumes dz=theta*(z-mean(z))dt+w,
  % where w is error term
  results=ols(dz, prevz-mean(prevz));theta=results.beta;

  halflife=-log(2)/theta
142  QUANTITATIVE TRADING

% halflife =
%
% 10.0037

The program finds that the half-life for mean reversion of the GLD-GDX is
about 10 days, which is approximately how long you should expect to hold
this spread before it becomes profitable.

    If you believe that your security is mean reverting, then you also
have a ready-made target price--the mean value of the historical
prices of the security, or µ in the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck formula. This
target price can be used together with the half-life as exit signals
(exit when either criterion is met).

    Target prices can also be used in the case of momentum models
if you have a fundamental valuation model of a company. But as
fundamental valuation is at best an inexact science, target prices
are not as easily justified in momentum models as in mean-reverting
models. If it were that easy to profit using target prices based on
fundamental valuation, all investors have to do is to check out stock
analysts' reports every day to make their investment decisions.

    Suppose you are running a trading model, and you entered into
a position based on its signal. Some time later, you run this model
again. If you find that the sign of this latest signal is opposite to your
original position (e.g., the latest signal is "buy" when you have an
existing short position), then you have two choices. Either you sim-
ply use the latest signal to exit the existing position and become flat
or you can exit the existing position and then enter into an opposite
position. Either way, you have used a new, more recent entry signal
as an exit signal for your existing position. This is a common way
to generate exit signals when a trading model can be run in shorter
intervals than the optimal holding period.

    Notice that this strategy of exiting a position based on running
an entry model also tells us whether a stop-loss strategy is recom-
mended. In a momentum model, when a more recent entry signal
is opposite to an existing position, it means that the direction of
momentum has changed, and thus a loss (or more precisely, a draw-
down) in your position has been incurred. Exiting this position now
Special Topics in Quantitative Trading  143

is almost akin to a stop loss. However, rather than imposing an ar-
bitrary stop-loss price and thus introducing an extra adjustable pa-
rameter, which invites data-snooping bias, exiting based on the most
recent entry signal is clearly justified based on the rationale for the
momentum model.

    Consider a parallel situation when we are running a reversal
model. If an existing position has incurred a loss, running the re-
versal model again will simply generate a new signal with the same
sign. Thus, a reversal model for entry signals will never recommend
a stop loss. (On the contrary, it can recommend a target price or
profit cap when the reversal has gone so far as to hit the opposite
entry threshold.) And, indeed, it is much more reasonable to exit
a position recommended by a mean-reversal model based on hold-
ing period or profit cap than stop loss, as a stop loss in this case
often means you are exiting at the worst possible time. (The only
exception is when you believe that you have suddenly entered into
a momentum regime because of recent news.)

SEASONAL TRADING STRATEGIES

This type of trading strategy is also called the calendar effect. Gen-
erally, these strategies recommend that you buy or sell certain secu-
rities at a fixed date of every year, and close the position at another
fixed date. These strategies have been applied to both equity and
commodity futures markets. However, from my own experience,
much of the seasonality in equity markets has weakened or even
disappeared in recent years, perhaps due to the widespread knowl-
edge of this trading opportunity, whereas some seasonal trades in
commodity futures are still profitable.

    The most famous seasonal trade in equities is called the January
effect. There are actually many versions of this trade. One ver-
sion states that small-cap stocks that had the worst returns in the
previous calendar year will have higher returns in January than
small-cap stocks that had the best returns (Singal, 2006). The ra-
tionale for this is that investors like to sell their losers in Decem-
ber to benefit from tax losses, which creates additional downward
