The question is, can we build a strategy
that is super effective for prop firms
and then not for the challenges because
that was covered in last week's episode,
but can it be very effective for if you
are a funded prop firm trader and what's
important, what to look at and how to
even build it in Perfectus AI. It will
be a beginner tutorial on how to build a
strategy for prop firms. This one super
high strike rate, super consistent in
the sense of what it does every single
month. And yeah, I think it's a nice
template to use. Of course, no financial
advice and let's dive into Perfectus and
let me show you the trades, the report
and how to build it. Okay, super excited
to dive into this strategy. It is made
not for a personal account. It is made
for just prop firm accounts and the
reason for it is it is super consistent,
but it has some big risks, okay? And
therefore on a prop firm account, it is
demo money and the payouts are real. So,
that is a different way and therefore I
play this a statistical game. It's like
how many payouts can I get without
[snorts] losing my account? If I can get
10 payouts and then lose my account,
I've made in those 10 payouts enough
that I can purchase a lot of new
challenge accounts, okay? That's the
statistical game I play with prop firms
and therefore maybe the strategy looks
epic to run on a personal private
account as well, but I don't recommend
to do that because there are some risk
with it and we're going to dive into it.
But besides that, you will have a
beautiful thing here. Let's dive into
the overall platform. So, if you are
new, what you can do is go to the link
in the bio of this video or in
description. Click on it, this strategy
opens. If you are new, just make a free
account and it opens up and you can
yeah, test and play around with it with
me. So, how does does this work? We put
everything of all the code we put in
blocks and therefore we built a drag and
drop platform. Why do we put it in
blocks? Because the code is pre-written,
it's consistent, it's always the same,
it's reliable, and that's what you want
with financial algorithms, right? And by
connecting these blocks with yes and no
answers, you can build a billion
different strategies. Like we have
automated all types of strategies. I'll
show you some here, and you can see all
trading styles are already automated. We
have been building so many strategies
and yeah, you can uh just find your
trading style. But first, let's focus on
prop firms now because that is the
current season.
This strategy, we have the blocks on the
canvas. Let me quickly explain
everything on this canvas runs every
single time the price moves. So, imagine
here seeing run per candle.
Run per candle just means every
candlestick close, the algorithm is
checking the next thing below and below
and below. It's like a decision tree.
If you run this algorithm, let's say
it's on the 15-minute time frame on Kiwi
Swiss, then I will keep it on the
15-minute time frame because then run
per candle means every 15 minutes, we're
going to check the next thing. What is
the next thing? Are we in a certain time
session? And this time session is using
inputs, but you can also just uh use
text, but let's uh do an input. An input
is a setting in your MetaTrader. If you
download this algorithm and not test in
the platform, but on your own terminal
in MetaTrader 5, then you want to adjust
settings when you upload it. And if you
have any questions, by the way, use the
question mark down below, uh and you can
ask anything to our AI because this
trained on all everything we build, our
documentation, our teachings, okay? With
that said, we have here running session
means start time is set at 2:00 at
night, and end time is set at uh 8:00 in
the evening. So, what that means is
every single 15-minute close,
we going to check are we within
2:00 in the morning or 2:00 at night and
8:00 in the evening. Okay, are we within
that timeframe? So, this algorithm
doesn't do anything before 2:00 and
after 8:00. So, are we in the session?
Yes. You can also maybe see it as like a
are we in the London session or Asian
session? Like you can build it all. And
you can even adjust options like are we
in a certain month or in a certain
weekday, but not relevant for now.
If that's true, if we
at the 15-minute close are within the
session, we going to check if the candle
close is above the upper band of the
Bollinger. If that is true, then we
going to check if the relative strength
index is also above the value 70. If
that is true, we going to check some
higher timeframe confluence. If that is
also set at one and I will explain what
this block does. These two are quite
simple, just simple price action, a
little bit more trends. And if you
watched last week's episode about
creating a prop firm challenge
algorithm, then you might already
recognize a little bit of this strategy,
but it is different. So,
stay with me. We have count trades. Do
we have any trades open? Yes or no? So,
is the trade count zero or is the order
count zero? This is also something if
you open your MetaTrader before you take
a trade, probably you remind
you know it out of your head like do I
have trades open today? And this
strategy doesn't want to have more
trades open every day. So, therefore we
check do we have zero trades? Yes, we
have zero orders also placed, no buy
limits or anything or sell orders in
this case. If that's true, we going to
place a sell pending order on a certain
price and that's the candle close of the
last 15-minute candle with a price price
offset of two pips or two pips away of
that closing price on the 15-minute
candle. One means last closed candle.
The if you want to place it on the
candle before, you can do candle uh two,
but Okay, let me quickly repeat. We have
Every 15 minutes, we're going to check
if we are in a session. If we are in a
session, we're going to see if the last
candle closed
on the 15-minute time frame is above the
Bollinger Band upper band. You have
three bands. And then, we also check if
the Relative Strength Index is above 70.
If that's also true, then we check one
more thing, more on that later, and then
count trades. If you have zero trades,
we're going to place a sell pending
order at the candle close with that
offset with a fixed volume, so a fixed
lot size. You can change that. It is an
input. Again, it is a setting that you
can use and create. Here, you can see
all the standard settings.
Then, we have stop loss. We have a stop
loss of pips. So, how many pips we are
using
a huge stop loss. So, we don't really
have a stop loss, and therefore, never
run this on a private account. It's like
super risky. It has a huge strike rate
because you
have a small target, so you reach your
target quickly. But then, if you're in
drawdown, you can be in deep drawdown
lose lose it all, right? So, never never
run this on a private account. It's way
too risky. Then, custom price level.
We're going to have a take profit at the
middle line. So, you have three
Bollingers. We're going to target the
mid line. We delete the order after 15
minutes. Quite similar to the strategy
of the last week's episode. By the way,
this we do a whole season about the
trading style. So, this is the prop firm
season. So, also check the last, I
think, three videos before this one.
We have here running session. So, we're
going to check between two and what was
it? Two and eight, we're going to check
something. What do we check? If the
candle high
of the 1-hour time frame
is currently above the upper band. If
that is true, we change a variable. So,
a variable is normally, if you create a
variable, let's go to inputs and
variables.
Uh you have inputs, settings, and
variables are things you write down or
the algorithm remembers, right? It's a
memory. So, like I said, if you want to
uh save something that your algorithm
knows, like what we do here, it uh you
want your algorithm to know is the
candle high above the Bollinger Band?
Yes. Maybe you want to store that
information for a while, okay? So, then
you can use a modified variable, and we
create that variable,
and we change the value of the variable.
Normally, a variable is set at zero, the
value is zero. You can name it however
you want. But, then we want to change
this variable to one. Or if the answer
is no, if the candle high is not above
the upper band, maybe you want to change
the variable back to zero. So, if it is
one, you know we are above the Bollinger
Band. If it's no, we are not above the
Bollinger Band. Okay?
Then,
we have here a lot of things. We have a
lot of sell orders, and this is where it
becomes very
crazy. We have running sessions, so
within that time frame, well, we we just
shared it. We want to select the trades,
so check if we have open trades.
Sells only.
And this is a sell pending order. And
we're going to use group numbers now.
So, you can tag every trade that an
algorithm stakes, you can tag it and
then use it for um yeah, to do an
action. So, let's say you have three
trades open. Maybe the middle trade, if
that reaches profit or stop loss, you
want to take another action or
something. Like you can tag with numbers
your trades. So, we're We're to do that.
Here, the sell pending, if this sell
pending order is triggered, it has the
tag one. Okay, so we always know or the
algorithm knows like we are not doing
anything. The algorithm does it. Uh the
algorithm knows, okay, I have a sell
pending order with group number one and
that tag just stays to it. So if
triggers, we have a sell trade with the
tag one.
Then we can select this trade. So we're
going to select the open trade with
group number one and it is a sell trade.
So now we select, we grab that trade and
we're going to do something with it.
We're going to check, okay, how much do
we float? So check profit loss.
We check if we have a floating amount is
bigger than or equal to and it is
losing, so the trade is negative.
Floating loss, let's see how bad do we
need to float?
We are floating negative 150, so euros
or dollars, depending on your account.
So we are floating minus 150 with this
first trade. If that is true,
then we
going to check if we don't have a a
number two trade, number three, four,
five, and six trade already open. So
we're going to check all if there are
more trades and if they are tagged.
Uh if that is
no, so we have zero.
So that's true. Then we're going to
place a sell now order. Well, this sell
now has a lot size two. It's a slightly
bigger lot size. We execute this trade.
We have a stop loss in pips, which is
still that insane big stop loss, but you
need the stop loss following the rules
of prop firms. And then the most
important, we now name this one group
two. So now we have a group one floating
negative and because we are floating
negative, we're going to add a second
position. We give it a tag number two.
That's super important. Okay? Now we
have a number two trade open. So the
next millisecond the algorithm runs this
again within the session at least. And
then it's going to select the open trade
number two. And then again, same story
true. If that number two is also
floating negative, we want to count if
we don't have
three, four, five, and six trades
already open. If not, we going to take
this trade other lot size again. We
going to stack trade. And we name it
group number three. Well, now you know
the deal. We going to select group
number three here again. Check the
floating profit if that is also floating
negative. We going to add another
position, okay? And if you keep doing
that, you have like every time price
goes against you, you stack. And that is
called a Martingale. And a Martingale
never run that on a private account,
right?
Um you know that now. I've said it a
billion times, but still let me remind
you. Uh because one day it just doesn't
come back and then you uh it loses a lot
of money. And that is why we are playing
with prop firms a statistical game of
trading where you want where you know,
okay, Martingale always blows up. I've
been seeing it over 10 years. The most
beautiful track records, every month
profit, then you know it's a Martingale.
The equity curve literally looks like
like this. The monthly returns look like
this. And then you have a minus 100
month. And it's all gone. I've Like I
said, I've seen it countless of times.
And it's ridiculous that people promote
those strategies to run on private money
because it looks so good and then it's
all gone. Yeah? But with prop firms it
is a different story because this is
demo money and you can get all these
payouts. And then it blows up, then you
are in profits, okay? Then you are in
profits.
So, that is my approach, just my
opinion. So, that is the strategy in a
nutshell. So, what do we have here? We
forgot one piece and that is select
trades. And then we close trades as as
So, we have all these trades open. We
don't have a target, right? We can
check, but we
Do we have a target with all these
scalings? No. So, what we are doing here
is we going to select all the trades.
Make sure you select it because if you
don't, then you're selecting zero
trades. So, select all the trades with
the tags.
They are just sells. We are only
selling.
You're calculating floating profit. So,
that is your equity minus your balance.
So, those are just things you can uh
find no no variables or anything. Uh
just a variable floating profit uh you
create.
And then you Yeah. You use it in a
formula.
Then you have floating profit is above
profit float. What's profit float?
Profit float is 150. So, if we are
floating 150 in profit, then we want to
do something. If that is true,
then we're going to select the trades,
all of them,
and we're going to close the trades.
So, thank you for watching. Click on the
descrip uh link in the description below
to get this template. Feel free to test
it around. Uh feel free to make it your
own and do something with it.
You know the risks. You know now how
prop firms work. You know how to how I
approach prop firm challenges, and you
now know how I also uh when you uh have
funded accounts, how I approach that.
It's all based on our experience. Thank
you for watching. See you in the next
one. Subscribe below. Join the Discord
as well. We have a free community for
prop traders. If you have questions,
comment below, and I see you in next
week's episode.
