                                                                                CHAPTER 7

   Trade Parameters
   for Various Market
   Conditions

                                                                                                                 73

    After learning about the emergence of the foreign exchange market, who the
                    major players are, significant historical milestones, and what moves the markets,
               it is time to move on and discuss some of my favorite strategies for trading currencies.
               However, before I even begin going over these strategies, the most important first
               step for any trader, regardless of the market that you are trading in, is to create a
               trading journal.

 Keep a Trading Journal

               Through my experience, I have learned that being a successful trader is not about
               finding the holy grail of indicators that can perfectly forecast movements 100% of
               the time, but instead, to develop discipline. I cannot undermine the importance of
               ``the journal'' as the primary first step to becoming a successful and professional
               trader. While working on the Inter-bank FX trading desk at J.P. Morgan and then
               on the Cross-Markets trading desk after the merger with Chase, the trading journal
               mentality was engrained into the minds of every dealer and proprietary trader on the
               trading floors, regardless of rank. The reason was simple--the bank was providing
               the capital for trading and we needed to be held accountable, especially since each
               transaction involved millions of dollars. For every trade that was executed, we
                                                needed to have a solid rationale as well as justification for the choice of entry and exit
                                                levels. More specifically, you had to know where to place your exit points before
                                                you placed the trade to approximate worst case losses and to manage risk.

                                                   With this sort of accountability, the leading banks of the world are able to breed
                                                successful and professional traders. For individual traders, this practice is even more
                                                important because you are trading with your own money and not someone else's.
                                                Bank traders are trading with someone else's money so regardless of how poorly
                                                they perform over a one- or two-week basis, they will receive their paycheck twice
                                                a month. At a bank, traders have plenty of time to make the money back without any
                                                disruptions to their daily way of life--unless of course they lose $1 million in one
                                                day. As an individual trader--you do not have this luxury. When you are trading
                                                with your own money, each dollar lost is a dollar less that you own. So even though
                                                you should only be trading with risk capital, or money that would not otherwise be
                                                used for rent or groceries, one way or the other, the pain is felt. To avoid repeating
                                                the same mistakes and taking large losses, I cannot stress enough the importance of
                                                keeping a trading journal. The journal is designed to ensure that as a trader, you
                                                only take calculated losses and learn from each mistake. The trading journal setup
                                                that I recommend should be broken up into three parts:

                                                1. Currency pair checklist

74                                              2. Trades that I am waiting for

                                                3. Existing or completed trades

TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS  Currency Pair Checklist

                                                The first section of your trading journal should consist of a spreadsheet that can be
                                                printed out and completed every day. This purpose of this checklist is to get a feel
                                                of the market and to identify trades. It should list of all of the currency pairs that are
                                                offered for trading on the left column, followed by three columns for the current,
                                                high, and low prices, and then a series of triggers laid out as a row on the right
                                                hand side. Newer traders should start with following only the four major currency
                                                pairs, which are the EURUSD, USDJPY, USDCHF, and the GBPUSD, and then
                                                gradually add the AUDUSD, USDCAD, and NZDUSD, followed by the nondollar
                                                pairs. Although the checklist that I have created is fairly detailed, I find that it is
                                                a very useful daily exercise and should take no more than 20 minutes to complete
                                                once the appropriate indicators are saved on the charts. The purpose of this checklist
                                                is to get a clear visual of which currencies are trending and which are range trading.
                                                Comprehending the big picture is the first step to trading successfully. Too often
                                                have I seen traders fail because they lose sight of the overall environment that they
                                                are trading in. The worst thing to do is to trade blindly. Trying to pick tops or
                                                bottoms in a strong trend or buying breakouts in a range-bound environment can
                                                lead to significant losses. Just take a look at Figure 7.1 of the EURUSD. If you tried
TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS75

                                              FIGURE 7.1 EURUSD Chart
                                                       Source: eSignal
                                                to pick bottoms in this pair, it would have led to an entire year of frustrating and

                                                unsuccessful trading. In trending environments, traders will find a higher success

                                                rate by buying on retracements in an uptrend or selling on rallies in a downtrend.

                                                Picking tops and bottoms should only be a strategy that is used in clear range trading

                                                environments and even with that, traders need to be careful of contracting ranges

                                                that can lead to breakout scenarios.

                                                A simplified version of the daily market overview sheet that I use is shown in

                                                Figure 7.2.

                                                As you can see in Figure 7.2, the first two columns after the daily high and low

                                                prices are the levels of the 10-day high or low. Recording this price helps to identify

                                                where current prices are within previous price action. This helps traders get a gauge

                                                of whether we are pressing toward a 10-day high or low or if we are simply trapped

                                                in the middle of the range. Yet the prices alone do not provide enough information

                                                to determine if we are in a trending or a range-bound environment. The next five

                                                indicators is a checklist for determining a trending environment. The more X marks

                                                in this section, the stronger the trend.

                                                The first column in the trending indicator group is the ``ADX (14) above 25.''

                                                ADX is the Accumulation Distribution Index, which is the most popular used

                                                indicator for determining the strength of a trend. If the index reading is above 25,

76                                              it indicates that a trend has developed. Generally speaking, the greater the number,

                                                the stronger the trend. The next column is Bollinger Bands. When strong trends

TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS  develop, the pair will frequently tag and cross either the upper or lower Bollinger

                                                Band. The next three trend indicators are the longer term moving averages. A

                                                break above or below these moving averages may also be indicative of a trending

                                                environment. With moving averages, crossovers in the direction of the trend can be

                                                used as a further confirmation. If there are two or more Xs in this section, traders

                                                should be looking for opportunities to buy on dips in an uptrend or sell on rallies in a

                                                downtrend rather than selling at the top and buying back at the bottom of the range.

                                                The last section of the trading journal is indications of range. The first indicator is

                                                also ADX, but this time, we are looking for ADX below 25, which signals that the

                                                currency pair's trend is weak. Next, we look at the traditional oscillators, RSI and

                                                stochastics. If the ADX is weak and there is significant technical resistance above,

                                                provided by indicators such as moving averages or Fibonacci retracement levels,

                                                and RSI and/or stochastics are at overbought or oversold levels, we identify an

                                                environment that is highly conducive to range trading.

                                                Of course, the market overview sheet is not foolproof, and just because you have

                                                a lot of X marks in either the trend or range group doesn't mean that a trend will

                                                not fade or a breakout will not occur. Yet, what this spreadsheet will do is prevent

                                                traders from trading blindly and ignoring the broader market conditions. It provides

                                                traders with a launching pad from which to identify the day's trading opportunities.
Date - Time

                                  Trending      Range

Currency Current Daily Daily 10-day 10-day Bollinger Bollinger (14) Crosses Crosses Crosses Bollinger ADX RS1 (14) (14) Stochastics Stochastics

Pair         Price High Low High Low Band Up Band Down above 25 50-Day 100-day 200-day Band (14) Greater Less > 70  < 30

                                            Range below than 80 than 80

                                            25

EURUSD 1.105 1.1144 1.0923     X  X             X                                                                   X

GBPUSD

USDJPY

USDCHF

AUDUSD                                                                                                                                           77

NZDUSD

USDCAD

EURJPY

EURGBP                                                                                                                                           TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS

EURCHF

AUDJPY

CHFJPY

GBPJPY

GBPCHF

AUDCAD

EURCAD

AUDNZD

FIGURE 7.2 Currency Checklist
TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONSTrades That I Am Waiting For

                         The next section in the trading journal lists out the possible trades for the day. Based
                         on an initial overview of the charts, this section is where you should list the trades
                         for which you are waiting. A sample entry would look like the following:

                            April 5, 2015
                            Buy AUDUSD on a break of 0.7850 (previous day high)
                            Stop at 0.7800 (50-day SMA)
                            Target 1--0.7925 (38.2% Fibonacci retracement of Nov-Mar bull wave)
                            Target 2--0.8075 (Upper Bollinger)
                            Target 3--10-day Trailing Low

                            As soon as your entry level is reached, you know exactly how to take action and
                         where to place your stops and limits. Of course, it is also important to take a quick
                         glance at the market to make sure that the trading conditions that you were waiting
                         for are still intact. For example, if you were looking for a strong breakout with no
                         retracement to occur at the entry level, when it does break, you want to make sure
                         that the break has decent momentum. This exercise will help you develop a plan of
                         action to approach your trading day. Before every battle, warriors will regroup to
                         go over the plan of attack--in trading, you want to have the same mentality. Plan
                         and prepare for the worst-case scenario and know your plan of attack for the day!
78
                       Existing or Completed Trades

                         This section is developed and used to enforce discipline and to learn from your
                         mistakes. At the end of each trading day, it is important to review this section to
                         understand why certain trades resulted in losses and others in profits. The purpose
                         of this section is to identify trends. To understand why this is important, let's look
                         at an example that is completely unrelated to trading. On a normal given day,
                         most people will subconsciously inject a lot of ``ums'' or ``uhs'' into their daily
                         conversation. However, most of these people do not even realize that they are even
                         doing so until someone records their conversation and replays it back to them. This
                         is one of the ways that professional presenters and newscasters train to kick the
                         habit of using placeholder words. Having worked with over 65,000 traders, too
                         often have I seen these traders make the same mistakes repeatedly. This includes
                         taking profits too early, letting losses run, getting emotional about trading, ignoring
                         economic releases, or entering a trade prematurely. Keeping a record of previous
                         trades is like keeping a recording of your conversations. When you flip back to the
                         trades that you have completed, you may have a perfect map of what strategies have
                         or have not been profitable for you. The reason why a journal is so important is
                         because it minimizes the emotional intervention of trades. I frequently see novice
                         traders take profits early but let losses run. The following are two samples of trade
                         journal entries that could have provided learning opportunities:
February 12, 2015
Trade: Short 3 lots of EURUSD @ 1.1045
Stop: 1.1195 (former all-time high)
Target: 1.0800
Result: Trade closed on Feb 13, 2015--stopped out of the 3 lots @ 1.1195

   (ｭ150 pips)
Comments: Got margin call! It broke the all-time high, I thought it was going

   to reverse, did not stick to stop--kept letting losses run, eventually margin
   call closed out all positions. Note to self: MAKE SURE STICK TO STOPS!

April 3, 2015

Trade: Long 2 lots of USDCAD @ 1.2135

Stop: 1.2000 (strong technical support--confluence of 50-day moving average

and 68% Fibonacci retracement of Feb--March rally)

Target: First lot @ 1.2295 (upper Bollinger and 5 pips shy of 1.2300 psychological

resistance)

Second lot @ 1.2450 (Former head and shoulders support turned resistance,

100-day SMA)

Result: Trade closed on April 5, 2015--stopped out of the 2 lots at 1.2000

(ｭ135 pips)

Comments: USDCAD did not continue uptrend and was becoming overbought,              79

I didn't see that ADX was weakening and falling from higher levels, there was

also a divergence in Stochastics. Note to self: MAKE SURE TO LOOK FOR               TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS

DIVERGENCES NEXT TIME!

   Unlike many traders, the best trades in my opinion are the trades where both
technicals and fundamentals support the trade. In general, I prefer to stay out of
trades that contradict my fundamental outlook. For example, if there is a bullish
formation in both the GBPUSD and the AUDUSD due to U.S. dollar weakness,
but the Bank of England has finished raising interest rates, while the Reserve
Bank of Australia has full intentions of tightening to tame the strength of the
Australian economy, I would most likely choose to express my bearish dollar view
in the AUDUSD rather than the GBPUSD. My bias for choosing the AUDUSD
over the GBPUSD would be even stronger if the AUDUSD already offered a
higher interest rate differential than the GBPUSD. I seen technicals thwarted by
fundamentals so often that now I always incorporate both into my trading strategy.
I use a combination of technical, fundamental, and positioning, and am generally
also a trend follower. I also typically use a top-down approach that involves the
following:

1. I will start by taking an overall technical survey of the market and pick the
    currency pairs that have retraced to attractive levels for entry in order to
    participate in a medium term fundamentally supportive trend.
                                                2. For currencies with a dollar component (i.e., not the crosses), I determine if my
                                                    initial technical view for that pair coincides with my fundamental view on the
                                                    dollar, as well as my view on how upcoming U.S. releases may impact trading
                                                    for the day. The reason why I look at the dollar specifically is because 80% of all
                                                    currency trades involve the dollar, which makes U.S. fundamentals particularly
                                                    important.

                                                3. If it is a cross, I will proceed by determining if the technical view coincides with
                                                    the fundamental outlook using Fibonacci retracements, ADX, moving averages,
                                                    oscillators, and other technical tools.

                                                4. Then I like to look at positioning using the Commitment of Traders Report or
                                                    the FXCM Speculative Sentiment index to see if it supports the trade.

                                                5. If I am left with two equally compelling trade ideas, I will choose the one with
                                                    a positive interest rate differential.

                                                Have a Toolbox--Use What Works for the Current Market
                                                Environment

                                                Once you have created a trading journal, it is time to figure out which indicators to

                                                lay on your charts. The reason why a lot of traders fail is because they neglect to

                                                realize that their favorite indicators are not foolproof. Buying when stochastics are

80                                              in oversold territory and selling when it is in overbought territory is a strategy that

TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS  is used quite often by range traders, to a great deal of success, but once the market

                                                stops range trading and begins to trend, then relying on stochastics could lead to

                                                tremendous amount of losses. In order to become consistently profitable, successful

                                                traders need to learn to be adaptable.

                                                One of the most important practices that every trader must understand is to be

                                                conscious of the environment that they are trading in. Every trader needs to have

                                                some sort of checklist that will help to classify the trading environment so that

                                                they can determine whether the market is trending or range bound. Defining

                                                trade parameters is one of the most important disciplines of trading. Too many

                                                traders have tried to pick the top within a trend, only to wind up with consistently

                                                unprofitable trades.

                                                Although defining trade parameters is important to traders in any market

                                                (currencies, futures, equities), it is particularly important in the currency market

                                                since over 80% of the volume is speculative in nature. This means that currencies

                                                can spend a very long period of time in a certain trading environment. Also, the

                                                currency market obeys technical analysis particularly well, given its large scale and

                                                number of participants.

                                                There are basically two types of trading environments, which means that at any

                                                point in time an instrument is either range trading or trending. The first step every

                                                trader needs to take is to define the current trading environment. The shortest time
frame that traders should start looking at when their trading day starts are daily
charts, even if you are trading on a 5-minute time frame.

 Step #1: Determine the Trading Environment

             Rules to Determining Trading Environment

               There are many different ways that traders can determine whether a currency pair
               is range trading or trending. Of course, many people do it visually, but having set
               rules will help to keep traders out of trends that may be fading or to prevent traders
               from getting into a range trade in the midst of a possible breakout. In Figure 7.3, I
               have outlined some of the rules that I look for in order to classify a currency pair's
               trading environment.

Profiling a Range Environment

Look for:

1. ADX (Average Directional Index) less than 20--The Average Directional Index is

one of the primary technical indicators used to determine the strength of a

trend. When ADX is less than 20, this suggests that the trend is weak, which                           81
is generally characteristic of range-bound market. If ADX is less than 20 and

trending downward, it provides a further confirmation that the trend is not only                       TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS

weak but will probably stay in a range-trading environment for a while longer.

2. Decreasing implied volatility--There are many ways to analyze volatility. What I

like to do is actually track short-term versus long-term volatility. When short-

term volatility is falling, especially after a burst above long-term volatility, it

is usually indicative of a reversion to range trading scenarios. Volatility usually

Trade      Rules                                         Indicators
Range                                                    Bollinger, Bands, ADX,
            ADX < 20                                     Options
Trend       Decreasing implied volatility
            Risk reversals near choice or flipping       Moving
                                                         averages, ADX, Options,
              between favoring calls and puts            Momentum

            ADX > 25
            Momentum consistent with trend

              direction
            Risk reversals strongly bid for put or call

FIGURE 7.3 Trend/Range Trading Rules
                                                blows out when a currency pair experiences sharp, quick moves. It contracts

                                                when ranges are narrow and the trading is very quiet in the markets. The lazy

                                                man's version of the way I track volatility is Bollinger Bands, which is actually

                                                also a fairly decent measure for determining volatility conditions. A narrow

                                                Bollinger Band suggests that ranges are small and there is low volatility in the

                                                markets, while wide Bollinger Bands are reflective of large ranges and a highly

                                                volatile environment. In a range-trading environment, we are looking for fairly

                                                narrow Bollinger Bands, ideally in a horizontal formation similar to the USDJPY

                                                chart in Figure 7.4.

                                                3. Risk reversals flipping between calls and puts: A risk reversal consists of a pair of

                                                options, a call and a put, on the same currency. Risk reversals have both the

                                                same expiration (1 month) and sensitivity to the underlying spot rate. They are

                                                quoted in terms of the difference in volatility between the two options. While

                                                in theory these options should have the same implied volatility in practice, these

                                                volatilities often differ in the market. Risk reversals can be seen as having a

                                                market polling function. A number strongly in favor of calls or puts indicates

                                                that the market prefers calls over puts. The reverse is true if the number is

                                                strongly in favor of puts versus calls. Thus, risk reversals can be used as a

                                                substitute for gauging positions in the FX market. In an ideal environment, far

                                                out of the money calls and puts should have the same volatility. However, this

82                                              is rarely the case, since there is generally a sentiment bias in the markets that

TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS  is reflected in risk reversals. In range-bound environments, risk reversals tend

                                                FIGURE 7.4 USDJPY Bollinger Band Chart
to flip between favoring calls and puts at nearly zero (or equal). This indicates
that there is indecision among bulls and bears, and there is no strong bias in
the markets.

What Does a Risk Reversal Table Look Like?

According to the risk reversals in Figure 7.5, we can see that the market is strongly
favoring yen calls (JC) and dollar puts over the long term. EURUSD short-term
risk reversals are near choice, which is what you are looking for when profiling a
range-bound environment. Risk reversal information used to be readily available
but is more difficult to find these days. Currently, the only place we know of that
provides this information is the Bloomberg Professional Terminal, which costs over
US$1500 a month.

Identifying a Trending Environment

Look for three things:

1. ADX (Average Directional Index) greater than 20--As mentioned earlier when we

talked about range-trading conditions, the Average Directional Index is one of

the primary technical indicators used to determine the strength of a trend. In

a trending environment, we look for ADX to be greater than 25 and rising. If           83
ADX is greater than 25 but sloping downward, especially off of the extreme 40

level, you have to be careful of aggressive trend positioning since it may indicate    TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS

that the trend is waning.

2. Momentum consistent with trend direction--In addition to using ADX, I also

recommend looking for confirmation of a trending environment through

momentum indicators. Traders should look for momentum to be consistent

14:40 GMT April 19th

1 Month To 1 Year Risk Reversal

Currency             1M R/R      3M R/R      6M R/R                1YR R/R

USDJPY               0.3/0.6 JC  0.7/1.0 JC  1.1/1.3 JC            1.3/1.6 JC
                                 0.0/0.3 EC
EURUSD               0.1/0.3 EC  0.0/0.3 SC  0.0/0.3 EC            0.1/0.4 EC
                                 0.0/0.3 CC
GBPUSD               0.0/0.3 SP              0.0/0.3 SC            0.0/0.3 SC

USDCHF               0.2/0.2 CC              0.0/0.4 CC            0.1/0.5 CC

* JC = Japanese yen call                     * SC = Sterling call

* EC = Euro call                             * CC = Swiss call

* SP = Sterling put

FIGURE 7.5 Risk Reversals
                                                    with the direction of the trend. Most currency traders will look for oscillators to
                                                    point strongly in the direction of the trend. For example, in an uptrend, trend
                                                    traders will look for the moving averages, RSI, stochastics, and MACD to all
                                                    point strongly upward. In a downtrend, they will look for these same indicators
                                                    to point downward. Some currency traders use the momentum index, but in
                                                    my experience, it is less popular and reliable. Instead, one of the strongest
                                                    momentum indicators is a perfect order of moving averages. A perfect order is
                                                    when we have the moving averages line up perfectly: that is, for an uptrend,
                                                    the 10-day SMA is greater than the 20-day SMA, which is greater 50-day SMA.
                                                    The 100-day SMA and the 200-day SMA are below the shorter-term moving
                                                    averages. In a downtrend, a perfect order would be when the shorter-term
                                                    moving averages stack up below the longer-term moving averages.
                                                3. Options (risk reversals)--With a trending environment, we are looking for risk
                                                    reversals to strongly favor calls or puts. When one side of the market is laden
                                                    with interest, it is usually indicative of a strong trending environment or that a
                                                    contra-trend move may be brewing if risk reversals are at extreme levels.

                                                 Step #2: Determine the Time Frame for Trade

84                                              Once you have determined that a currency pair is either range-bound or trending,

                                                it is time to determine how long you plan on holding the trade. The following is a

TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS  set of guidelines and indicators that I use for trading different time frames. Not all

                                                of the guidelines need to be met, but the more guidelines that are met, the more

                                                solid the trading opportunity.

                                                Intraday Trade (Range)

                                                Rules:

                                                1. Use hourly charts to determine entry points and daily charts to confirm that a
                                                    range trade exists on a longer-time frame.

                                                2. Use oscillators to determine entry point within range.
                                                3. Look for short-dated risk reversals to be near choice.
                                                4. Look for reversal in oscillators (RSI or stochastics at extreme point).
                                                5. Trade stronger when prices fail at key resistance or hold key support levels (use

                                                    Fibonacci retracement points and moving averages).

                                                Indicators Used:
                                                   Stochastics, MACD, RSI, Bollinger Bands, options, Fibonacci retracement
                                                      levels
Medium-Term Range Trade

Rules:

1. Use daily charts.
2. There are two ways to range trade medium term--position for upcoming range

    trading opportunities or get involved in existing ranges.
3. Upcoming range opportunities: Look for high-volatility environments, where short-

    term implied volatilities are significantly higher than longer-term volatilities.
    Seek reversion back to the mean environments.
4. Existing ranges: Use Bollinger Bands to identify existing ranges.
5. Look for reversals in oscillators such as RSI and stochastics.
6. Make sure ADX is below 25 and ideally falling.
7. Look for medium-term risk reversals near choice.
8. Confirm with price action--failure at key range resistances and bounces on key
    range supports (using traditional technical indicators).

Indicators:
   Options, Bollinger Bands, stochastics, MACD, RSI, Fibonacci retracement
      levels

Medium-Term Trend Trade                                                                85

Rules:                                                                                 TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS

1. Look for ranges on daily charts and use weekly charts for confirmation.
2. Refer back to the characteristics of a trending environment--look for those

    parameters to be met.
3. Buy breakout/retracement scenarios on key Fibonacci levels or moving averages.
4. Look for no major resistance levels in front of trade.
5. Look for candlestick pattern confirmation.
6. Look for moving average confluence to be on same side of trade.
7. Enter on a break of significant high or low.
8. The ideal is to wait for volatilities to contract before getting in.
9. Look for fundamentals to also be supportive of trade--growth and interest

    rates. You want to see a string of economic surprises or disappointments
    depending on directional bias.

Indicators
   ADX, Parabolic SAR, RSI, Ichimoku Clouds, Elliot waves, Fibonacci
                                                Medium-Term Breakout Trade

                                                Rules:

                                                1. Use daily charts.
                                                2. Look for contraction in short-term volatility to a point where it is sharply below

                                                    long-term volatility.
                                                3. Use pivot points to determine whether a break is a true break or a false break.
                                                4. Look for moving average confluences to be supportive of trade.

                                                Indicators
                                                   Bollinger Bands, moving averages, Fibonacci

                                                 Risk Management

                                                Although risk management is one of the more simple topics to grasp, it is also one

                                                of the most important. Too often we have seen traders turn winning positions into

                                                losing positions and solid strategies result in losses instead of profits. The fact of the

                                                matter is that regardless of how intelligent and knowledgeable a trader may be about

                                                the markets, their own psychology will cause them to lose money. Why does this

                                                happen? Are the markets really so enigmatic that few can profit? Or is there simply

86                                              a common mistake that virtually all traders are prone to making? The answer is the

TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS  latter. And the good news is that the problem, while it can be an emotionally and

                                                psychologically challenging, is ultimately fairly easy to grasp and solve.

                                                Most traders lose money simply because they have no understanding or place no

                                                importance in risk management. Risk management involves essentially knowing how

                                                much you are willing to risk and how much you are looking to gain. Without a

                                                sense of risk management, most traders simply hold on to losing positions for an

                                                extremely long amount of time, but take profits on winning positions prematurely.

                                                The result is a seemingly paradoxical scenario that in reality is all too common: The

                                                trader ends up having more winning positions than losing ones, but ends up with a

                                                negative P/L. So, what can traders do to ensure they have solid risk management

                                                habits? There are a few key guidelines that every trader, regardless of their strategy

                                                or what they are trading, should keep in mind:

                                                 Risk-reward ratio. Traders should look to establish a risk-reward ratio for every
                                                  trade they place. In other words, they should have an idea of how much they are
                                                  willing to lose, and how much they are looking to gain. Generally, the risk-reward
                                                  ratio should be at least 1:2, if not more. Having a solid risk-reward ratio can
                                                  prevent traders from entering positions that ultimately are not worth the risk.

                                                 Stop-loss orders. Traders should also employ stop-loss orders as a way of specifying
                                                  the maximum loss they are willing to accept. By using stop-loss orders, traders
  can avoid the common predicament of being in a scenario where they have many           TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS
  winning trades but a single loss large enough to eliminate any trace of profitability
  in the account. Trailing stops to lock in profits are particularly useful. A good
  habit of more successful traders is to employ the rule of moving your stop to
  break even as soon as your position has profited by the same amount that you
  initially risked through the stop order. At the same time, some traders may also
  choose to close a portion of their position.

   For those looking to add to a winning position or go with trend, the best strategy
is to treat it as if it were a new trade of its own, independent of the winning position.
If you are going to add to a winning position, perform the same analysis of the chart
that you would if you had no position at all. If a trade continues to go in your favor,
you can also close out part of the position while trailing your stop higher on the
remaining lots that you are holding. Try thinking about your risk and reward on
each separate lot that you have bought if they are at different entry points as well. If
you buy a second lot 50 pips above your first entry point, don't use the same stop
price on both, but manage the risk on the second lot independently from the first.

Using Stop-Loss Orders to Manage Risk

Given the importance of money management to successful trading, using the stop-
loss order is imperative for any trader looking to succeed in the currency market. 87
Stop-loss orders allow traders to specify the maximum loss they are willing to
accept on any given trade. If the market reaches the rate the trader specifies in
his/her stop-loss order, then the trade will be closed immediately. As a result, using
stop-loss orders allows you to know how much you are risking at the time you enter
the trade.

   There are two parts to successfully using a stop-loss order: (1) initially placing
the stop at a reasonable level and (2) trailing the stop--or moving it forward toward
profitability--as the trade progresses in your favor.

Placing the Stop Loss

We recommend two ways of placing a trailing stop-loss order:

 The first is a two-day low method. These volatility-based stops involve placing your
  stop-loss order approximately 10 to 20 pips below the two-day low of the pair.
  For example, if the low on the EURUSD's most recent candle was 1.1200, and
  the previous candle's low was 1.1100, then the stop should be placed around
  1.1090--10 pips below the two-day low--if a trader is looking to get long. This
  type of trailing stop allows you to keep tight control of the position and minimizes
  the time in trade. The downside is that it can be closed prematurely during a brief
  period of consolidation.
                                                 Parabolic SAR. Another form of volatility-based stop is the parabolic SAR, an
                                                  indicator that is found on many currency trading charting applications. This
                                                  indicator graphically displays a small dot at the point on the chart where the stop
                                                  should be placed. The benefit of parabolic SAR is that it is dynamic and generally
                                                  further away from the current price.

                                                There is no magic formula for what works best in every situation, but the

                                                following is an example of how these stops could be used.

                                                Upon entering a long position, determine where support is and place a stop 20

                                                pips below support. For example, let's say this is 60 pips below the entry point. If

                                                the trade earns a profit of 60 pips, close half of my position using a market order,

                                                then move the stop up to the entry point. At this point, trail the stop 60 pips behind

                                                the moving market price. If the parabolic SAR moves up so that it is above the entry

                                                point, you could switch to using parabolic SAR as the stop level. Of course, during

                                                the day, there can be other signals that could prompt you to move your stop. If the

                                                price breaks through a new resistance level, that resistance then becomes support.

                                                You can place a stop 20 pips below that support level, even if it is only 30ｭ40

                                                pips away from the current price. The underlying principle you have to use is to

                                                find a point to place your stop where you would no longer want to be in the trade

                                                once the price reaches that level. Usually it falls at a point where the price goes

                                                below support.

88                                              Aside from employing proper risk management strategies, one of the other

TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS  more crucial yet overlooked elements of successful trading is maintaining a healthy

                                                psychological outlook. At the end of the day, a trader who is unable to cope with the

                                                stress of market fluctuations will not stand the test of time--no matter how skilled

                                                they may be at the more scientific elements of trading. Here are some tips:

                                                 Practice emotional detachment. That is, traders must make trading decisions based on
                                                  strategies independent of fear and greed. One of the premiere attributes a good
                                                  trader has is emotional detachment: While these traders are dedicated and fully
                                                  involved in their trades, they are not emotionally married to them; they accept
                                                  losing, and make their investment decisions on an intellectual level. Traders who
                                                  are emotionally involved in trading often make substantial errors, as they tend
                                                  to whimsically change their strategy after a few losing trades, or become overly
                                                  carefree after a few winning trades. A good trader must be emotionally balanced,
                                                  and must base all trading decisions on strategy--not fear or greed.

                                                 Know when to take a break. In the midst of a losing streak, consider taking a break
                                                  from trading before fear and greed dominate your strategy.
                                                     Not every trade can be a winning one. As a result, traders must be psycholog-
                                                  ically capable of coping with losses. Most traders, even successful ones, will go
                                                  through a stretch of losing trades. The key to being a successful trader, though,
                                                  is being able to go through a losing stretch unfazed and undeterred. If you are
experiencing a string of losing trades, it may be time to take a break from trading.
Often, taking a few days off from watching the market to clear your mind can be
the best remedy for a losing streak. Continuing to trade relentlessly during a tough
market condition can breed greater losses and ruin your psychological trading
capacity. Ultimately, it's always better to acknowledge your losses rather than
continue to fight through them and pretend they don't exist. Make no mistake
about it: Regardless of how much you study, practice, or trade, there will be losing
trades throughout your entire career. The key is to make them small enough that
you can live to trade another day and allow your winning trades room to breathe
and flourish. You can overcome a lot of bad luck with proper money management
techniques. This is why we have stressed a 2:1 reward to risk ratio, and why we
recommend not risking more than 2% of your equity on any single trade.

   Whether you are trading forex, equities, or futures, there are 10 trading rules
that successful traders should live by:

1. Limit your losses.

2. Let your profits run.

3. Keep position sizes within reason.

4. Know your risk versus reward ratio.

5. Be adequately capitalized.

6. Don't fight the trend.                                                             89

7. Never add to losing positions.                                                     TRADE PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MARKET CONDITIONS

8. Know market expectations.

9. Learn from your mistake--keep a trade log.

10. Have a maximum drawdown.
