                                                                 CHAPTER 8

Technical Trading
Strategy: Multiple
Time Frame
Analysis

                                                                                                  91

To trade successfully on an intraday basis, it is important to be selective. Trend
     trading is one of the most popular strategies employed by global macro hedge
funds. Although many traders prefer to range trade, the big profit potentials tend to
lie in trades that capture and participate in big market moves. It was once said by
Mark Boucher, a hedge fund manager of Midas Trust Fund and a former number-one
money manager as ranked by Nelson's World Best Money Managers, that 70% of a
market's moves occurs 20% of the time. This makes multiple time frame analysis
particularly important, because no trader wants to lose sight of the big picture. A
great comparison would be to imagine taking a road trip from Chicago to Florida.
There are going to be a lot of left and right turns along the way, but the most
important thing to be aware of during the trip is that you should be headed south.
The same approach should be taken in trading. Looking for opportunities to buy in
an uptrend or sell in a downtrend can be far much more profitable than trying to
pick tops and bottoms.

   The most common form of multiple time frame analysis is to use daily charts to
identify the overall trend and then use the hourly charts to determine specific entry
levels.
                                                          FIGURE 8.1 USDJPY Monthly Chart

92                                                        Source: eSignal

TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: MULTIPLE TIME FRAME ANALYSIS     Take a look at the USDJPY chart in Figure 8.1. This is a daily chart of the
                                                          U.S. dollar against the Japanese yen (USDJPY). As you can see, USDJPY has been
                                                          trending higher since late 2012. During this period, range or contrarian traders
                                                          looking to pick tops would have been faced with at least two years of difficult and
                                                          most likely unprofitable trading--particularly when the currency pair was hitting
                                                          three- or four-year highs in late 2013 and early 2014. This area would have certainly
                                                          attracted a good deal of traders looking to pick a top or to fade the trend. Despite
                                                          a dip in mid-2013, USDJPY remained strong going into 2105, making life very
                                                          difficult for medium-term range players.

                                                             Instead, the more effective trading strategy would have been to take a position
                                                          in the direction of the trend. In USDJPY, this would have involved looking for
                                                          opportunities to buy on dips. Figure 8.2 shows one way to do so on a 15-minute
                                                          chart using the Relative Strength Index (RSI). Rather than looking for opportunities
                                                          to sell when RSI rose above 70, it was smarter to buy when it dipped to 30. The first
                                                          horizontal line in Figure 8.2 shows the point at which RSI rose above 70. If you sold
                                                          at that level, USDJPY would have moved against you by 40 pips before reversing.
                                                          The second horizontal line shows the point at which RSI dipped to 30. If you bought
                                                          at that level, you would have picked the bottom on this short term USDJPY chart
                                                          for a move of at least 50 pips.
FIGURE 8.2 USDJPY 15-Minute Chart

Source: eSignal                                                                        93

   Now let's take a look at another example of the British pound. Figure 8.3           TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: MULTIPLE TIME FRAME ANALYSIS
shows the monthly chart of the USDCAD from January 2013 to January 2015. Like
USDJPY, traders trying to pick tops in the USDCAD would have faced at least two
straight years of difficult trading--particularly when the USDCAD was climbing
to fresh five-year highs in late 2014 early 2015. This level would have certainly
attracted a number of top pickers. To the frustration of those who tried to fade
the move, USDCAD rallied 9% beyond its five-year highs, which means those top
pickers would have incurred significant losses. Taking a look at the hourly chart for
the USDCAD, we want to look for opportunities to buy on dips rather than sell on
rallies. Figure 8.4 shows Fibonacci retracement levels drawn from the 2002 to 2008
bear wave. Those levels held pretty well with declines finding support at the 38.2%
Fibonacci retracements between January 2008, January 2009, and January 2015.

   Multiple time frame analysis can also be employed on a shorter-term basis. Let
us take a look at an example using CHFJPY. First we start with the hourly chart
of CHFJPY, shown in Figure 8.5. Using Fibonacci retracements, we can see on the
hourly charts that prices have failed at the 38.2% retracement of the December 30,
2004, to February 9, 2005, bear wave numerous times. This indicates that the
pair is contained within a weeklong downtrend below those levels. In this case,
we want to use our 15-minute charts to look for entry levels to participate in the
                                                          FIGURE 8.3 USDCAD Weekly Chart

94                                                        Source: eSignal

TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: MULTIPLE TIME FRAME ANALYSIS  overall downtrend. However, in order to increase the successfulness of this trade,
                                                          we want to make sure that CHFJPY is also in a downtrend on a daily basis. Taking
                                                          a look at Figure 8.6, we can see that CHFJPY is indeed trading below the 200-day
                                                          simple moving average, with the 20-day SMA crossing below the 100-day SMA. This
                                                          confirms the bearish momentum in the currency pair. So as a day trader, we move to
                                                          the 15-minute chart to identify entry levels. Figure 8.7 is the 15-minute chart; the
                                                          horizontal line is the 38.2% Fibonacci retracement of the earlier downtrend. We
                                                          see that CHFJPY broke above the horizontal line on May 11, 2005; however, rather
                                                          than buying into a potential breakout trade, the bearish big picture reflected on the
                                                          hourly and daily charts point to a contrarian trade. In fact, there were two instances
                                                          shown in Figure 8.7 where the currency pair broke above the Fibonacci level only
                                                          to trade significantly lower. Disciplined day traders would use those opportunities
                                                          to fade the breakout.

                                                             The importance of multiple time frame analysis cannot be underestimated.
                                                          Looking at the big picture first can help to keep traders out of a lot of dangerous
                                                          trades. The majority of new traders in the market are range traders for the simple
                                                          fact that buying at the low and selling at the high is an easy concept to grasp.
TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: MULTIPLE TIME FRAME ANALYSIS95

                                            FIGURE 8.4 USDCAD Hourly Chart
                                                      Source: eSignal
TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: MULTIPLE TIME FRAME ANALYSIS96

    FIGURE 8.5 CHFJPY Hourly Chart
Source: eSignal
TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: MULTIPLE TIME FRAME ANALYSIS97

                                                     FIGURE 8.6 CHFJPY Daily Chart
                                                               Source: eSignal
TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: MULTIPLE TIME FRAME ANALYSIS98

    FIGURE 8.7 CHFJPY 15-Minute Chart
Source: eSignal
Of course, this strategy will work from time to time, but traders need to be
mindful of the overall trading environment if they want to be consistently profitable.
Referencing back to Chapter 7, range traders should only try to play the trade
when the conditions for a range bound market are met. One useful way to identify
this type of market is to look for ADX to be less than 25 and ideally trending
downward.

                                                                                                  99

TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: MULTIPLE TIME FRAME ANALYSIS
                                                                 CHAPTER 9

Technical Strategy:
Trading with
Double Bollinger
Bands

                                                                                                  101

One of the most useful technical indicators in my experience is Bollinger Bands.
      Traditionally, Bollinger Bands are used as overbought and oversold indicators,
but given the trending nature of currencies, there are more efficient ways to use the
bands. Traditionally, Bollinger Bands consists of three lines--the 20-period moving
average and the two standard deviation bands above and below the moving average.
If the currency pair rises to the upper Bollinger Band, it is considered overbought
because the move extended to an extreme level and should therefore be faded. The
same is true if it drops to the lower Bollinger Band. Unfortunately, currencies are
trending, and using the 20-period two standard deviation bands may not be the best
way to trade. Take a look at Figure 9.1. In this daily chart of EURUSD, the arrows
highlight the points where the currency pair ``hugs'' the second standard deviation
band. If you bought each time EURUSD touched the lower band or sold each time it
touched the upper band, there would be significant losses before the currency pair
finally turned around.

   The better technique would be to add another set of Bollinger Bands--the 20-
period, one-standard deviation. This would put four bands on the chart if the basis
TECHNICAL STRATEGY: TRADING WITH DOUBLE BOLLINGER BANDS102

                       FIGURE 9.1 EURUSD Bollinger Band Daily Chart
                          Source: eSignal
or the 20-period moving average is removed, and most charting packages will allow
you to do that. Figure 9.2 shows how the same EURUSD daily chart with look with
two sets of Bollinger Bands. The outer lines are the two-standard-deviation Bollinger
Bands, and the two inner lines are the one-standard-deviation Bollinger Bands.

 Using Double Bollinger Bands to Pick Tops
   and Bottoms

Having two sets of Bollinger Bands on your chart is a much more effective way
to pick a top or bottom in currencies. The general rule of thumb is that we don't
buy a bottom until the currency pair has traded above the first standard deviation
Bollinger Band. Along the same lines, we do not sell a top until the pair trades
below the first standard deviation Bollinger Band. While this technique may not
pick the perfect bottom, it can help avoid prematurely picking a top or bottom
which can mean major losses in a trending environment. Here are the rules for the
long and short trades on a daily chart for picking tops and bottoms using the double
Bollinger Bands.

Strategy Rules for Long Trade

1. Look for the currency pair to be trading between the lower first and second         103

standard deviation Bollinger Bands.

2. Look for a close above the first standard deviation Bollinger Band.                 TECHNICAL STRATEGY: TRADING WITH DOUBLE BOLLINGER BANDS

3. If so, BUY at close of candle or 5pm NY Time.

4. Stop 50 pips below first standard deviation Bollinger Band.

5. Close half of position when it moves by amount risked; move stop on rest to

initial entry price (breakeven).

6. Close remainder of position at two times risk or trail the stop.

Strategy Rules for Short Trade
1. Look for the currency pair to be trading between the upper first and second

    standard deviation Bollinger Bands.
2. Look for a close below the first standard deviation Bollinger Band.
3. If so, sell at close of candle or 5pm NY Time.
4. Stop 30 pips above first standard deviation Bollinger Band.
5. Close half of position when it moves by amount risked; move stop on rest to

    initial entry price (breakeven).
6. Close remainder of position at two times risk or trail the stop.

   Lets take a look at the same EURUSD chart. Figure 9.3 shows the points at which
a trade would have been entered, and in most cases, it was a more effective way to
pick a top or bottom in the currency pair.
TECHNICAL STRATEGY: TRADING WITH DOUBLE BOLLINGER BANDS104

                       FIGURE 9.2 EURUSD Bollinger Band Daily Chart
                          Source: eSignal
                                              105

FIGURE 9.3 EURUSD Bollinger Band Daily Chart  TECHNICAL STRATEGY: TRADING WITH DOUBLE BOLLINGER BANDS
Source: eSignal
                                                         FIGURE 9.4 EURUSD Short Trade
                                                         Source: eSignal

106                                                         Now let's take a look at some examples in more detail. In Figure 9.4, we see that
                                                         on May 18, the EURUSD, which had been trading between the two upper bands,

TECHNICAL STRATEGY: TRADING WITH DOUBLE BOLLINGER BANDS  fell strongly to break out of the zone and close below the first standard deviation

                                                         Bollinger Band. We sell at the NY close (there's usually a leeway of two hours). A

                                                         two-lot trade is established at 1.1313 with a stop 30 pips above the first standard

                                                         deviation Bollinger Band (1.1341) at 1.1371. The risk is 58 pips, which means that

                                                         the first exit is 1.1313 minus 58 pips or 1.1255. The second profit target is 1.1197,

                                                         which is two times risk or 116 pips. The first and second profit targets are reached

                                                         on the very next day when the currency pair drops to a low of 1.1119, for a profit

                                                         of 58 pips on the first half of the position and another 116 pips on the second half. If

                                                         the stop was trailed using a moving average or percentage, a trader may have been

                                                         able to capitalize on the selloff that ensued.

                                                         Figure 9.5 shows that on June 2, the EURUSD, which had been trading between

                                                         the two lower bands, rose strongly to break out of the zone and close firmly above

                                                         the first standard deviation Bollinger Band. We buy at the NY close (there's usually

                                                         a leeway of two hours). A two-lot trade is established at 1.1151, with a stop 30 pips

                                                         below the first standard deviation Bollinger Band (1.0970) at 1.0940. The risk is 211

                                                         pips, which means that the first exit is 1.1151 plus 211 pips, or 1.1361. This profit

                                                         target is reached two days later, when the currency pair races to a high of 1.1380.

                                                         At the time, the stop is moved to 1.1151, and the following day the breakeven stop
14:40 GMT April 19th
1 Month To 1 Year Risk Reversal

Currency             1M R/R       3M R/R       6M R/R                1YR R/R

USDJPY               0.3/0.6 :IC  0.7/1.0 JC   1.1/1.3 JC            1.3/1.6 JC
                                  0.0/0.3 EC
EURUSD               0.1/0.3 EC   0.0/0.3 SC   0.0/0.3 EC            0.1/0.4 EC
                                  0.0/0.3 CC.
GBPUSD               0.0/0.3 SP                0.0/0.3 SC            0.0/0.3 SC

USDCHF               0.2/0.2 CC                0.0/0.4 CC            0.1/0.5 CC

* JC = Japanese Yen Call                       * SC = Sterling Call

* EC = Euro Call                               * CC = Swiss Call

* SP = Sterling Put

FIGURE 9.5 EURUSD Long Trade                                                          TECHNICAL STRATEGY: TRADING WITH DOUBLE BOLLINGER BANDS
Source: eSignal

is hit, and we end up banking only +211 on the first half of the trade with no losses
or gains on the second half.

Using Double Bollinger Bands to Determine Trend versus Range

In addition to identifying levels to pick tops and bottoms, the double Bollinger Bands
can also be very helpful in determining the market environment. One of the most 107
commonly asked questions in forex is whether a currency pair is in trend or range.
When the pair is trading between the two lower or upper Bollinger Bands, it is in
trend, and when it is trading between the first standard deviation Bollinger Bands,
it is in range, as shown in Figure 9.6. When the currency pair is in trend mode,
it is best to look for opportunities to join the trend. When it is in the range zone,
picking tops and bottoms is preferred.

Using Double Bollinger Bands to Join a New Trend

Another way to use the double Bollinger Bands is to join a new uptrend or downtrend
using a daily chart. Here are the trading rules:

Strategy Rules for Long Trade
1. Look for the currency pair to close above the first standard deviation Bollinger

    Band.
2. Check to see if the last two candles were below the first standard deviation

    Bollinger Band.
3. If so, buy at close of candle or 5pm NY Time.
4. Initial stop at +65 pips.
TECHNICAL STRATEGY: TRADING WITH DOUBLE BOLLINGER BANDS108

                       FIGURE 9.6 GBPUSD Bollinger Band Trend Range Chart
                          Source: eSignal
FIGURE 9.7 USDJPY Long Trade                                                                        TECHNICAL STRATEGY: TRADING WITH DOUBLE BOLLINGER BANDS
Source: eSignal

                                                                                                 109

FIGURE 9.8 GBPUSD Short Trade
Source: eSignal
                                                         5. Close half of position at +50 pips; move stop on rest to initial entry price
                                                             (breakeven).

                                                         6. Close remainder of position at +195 pips.

                                                         Strategy Rules for Short Trade

                                                         1. Look for the currency pair to close below the first standard deviation Bollinger
                                                             Band.

                                                         2. Check to see if the last two candles were above the first standard deviation
                                                             Bollinger Band.

                                                         3. If so, sell at close of candle or 5pm NY Time.
                                                         4. Initial stop at +65 pips.
                                                         5. Close half of position at +50 pips; move stop on rest to initial entry price

                                                             (breakeven).
                                                         6. Close remainder of position at +195 pips.

                                                         Here are some examples:

                                                         In Figure 9.7, we see that USDJPY closed above the first standard deviation

                                                         Bollinger Band on May 18. We check to see if the last two candles were below the

                                                         band and the rules are satisfied, allowing us to initiate a long trade at 119.97. The

                                                         stop is placed 65 pips below at 119.32. The target for the first half of the position is

110                                                      50 pips, or 120.47, and the target for the second half is 195 pips, or 121.92. The

                                                         first profit target is reached 24 hours later (which is generally the case). When that

TECHNICAL STRATEGY: TRADING WITH DOUBLE BOLLINGER BANDS  happens, the stop is raised to 119.97, which is the initial entry or breakeven price.

                                                         The trade is left on and the second profit target of +195 pips is reached six trading

                                                         days after the trade was first initiated.

                                                         In Figure 9.8, we see GBPUSD close below the first standard deviation Bollinger

                                                         Band on March 4, so we check to see if the last two candles were above the band and

                                                         the rules are satisfied, allowing us to initiate a short trade at 5pm when the currency

                                                         pair is trading at 1.5263. The stop is placed 65 pips above at 1.5328. The target for

                                                         the first half of the position is 50 pips, or 1.5213, and the target for the second half

                                                         is 195 pips, or 1.5068. The trade floats for 24 hours, then GBPUSD drops sharply,

                                                         hitting our first and second profit target on the very same day.

                                                         We encourage you to lay the Bollinger Bands on your charts and look for more

                                                         examples of these strategies in action. There are many ways to use the double

                                                         Bollinger Bands for forex trading. Both of these strategies are for daily charts, but

                                                         different strategies and rules can be used for intraday trading using the bands.
                                                                CHAPTER 10

Technical Trading
Strategy: Fading
the Double Zeros

                                                                                                  111

One of the most widely overlooked areas of trading is market structure.
      Developing a keen understanding of market structure and its dynamics
can help day traders to gain an unbelievable advantage. Developing a feel and
understanding for market dynamics is key to profitably taking advantage of short-
term fluctuations. In foreign exchange trading this is especially critical as the primary
influence of intraday price action is order flow. Given the fact that most individual
traders are not privy to sell-side bank order flow, day traders looking to profit from
short-term fluctuations need to learn how to identify and anticipate price zones
where large order flows should be triggered. This technique is very efficient for
intraday traders as it allows them to get on the same side as the market maker.

   When trading intraday, it is impossible to look for bounces off every support or
resistance level and expect to be profitable. The key to successful intraday trading
requires more selectivity and only entering at those levels where a reaction is more
likely. Trading off psychologically important levels such as the double zeros or round
numbers is one good way of identifying such opportunities. Double zeros represent
numbers where the last two digits are zeros. Examples of double zeros would be
118.00 in USDJPY or 1.1100 in the EURUSD. After noticing how many times a
currency pair would bounce off double zero support or resistance levels intraday
despite the underlying trend, we have observed that these bounces are usually much
larger and more relevant that rallies off other price levels. This type of reaction is
                                                     perfect for intraday FX traders because it gives them the opportunity to make 30 to

                                                     50 pips while risking only 15Ł20 pips.

                                                     This trading technique is not difficult, but it requires individual traders to develop

                                                     a solid feel for dealing room and market participant psychology. The idea behind this

                                                     double zero methodology is simple. Large banks with access to conditional order

                                                     flow have a distinct advantage over other market participants. The bank's order book

                                                     gives them direct insight into potential reactions at different price levels. Dealers

                                                     will often use this strategic information to put on short-term positions in their own

                                                     accounts.

                                                     Market participants as a whole tend to put conditional orders near or around

                                                     the same levels. While stop-loss orders are usually placed just beyond the round

                                                     numbers, traders will cluster their take profit orders at the round number. The

                                                     reason why this occurs is because traders are humans, and humans tend to think in

                                                     round numbers. As a result, take profit orders have a very high tendency of being

                                                     placed at the double zero level. Since the FX market is a 24-hour continuous market,

                                                     speculators also use stop and limit orders more frequently than in other markets.

                                                     Large banks with access to conditional order flow, like stops and limits, actively seek

                                                     to exploit this clustering of positions to basically gun stops. The fading the double zero

                                                     strategy attempts to put traders on the same side as market makers by positioning

                                                     traders for a quick contra-trend move at the double zero level.

112                                                  This trade is most profitable when there are other technical indicators that will

TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: FADING THE DOUBLE ZEROS  confirm the significance of the double zero level. Here are some guidelines for fading

                                                     the double zeros or ``round numbers.''

                                                      Strategy Rules

                                                                    Long:

                                                                   1. Identify a currency pair that is trading below its intraday 20-period simple
                                                                        moving average on a 15-minute chart.

                                                                   2. Enter a long position 10 to 15 pips above the figure.
                                                                   3. Place an initial protective stop 20 pips below the figure.

                                                                        a. When the position is profitable by the amount risked, close half of the
                                                                             position and move your stop on the remaining portion of the trade to
                                                                             breakeven.

                                                                        b. Trail your stop as the price moves in your favor.

                                                                    Short:
                                                                    1. Identify a currency pair that is trading above its intraday 20-period simple

                                                                        moving average on a 15-minute chart.
                                                                    2. Short the currency pair 10 to 15 pips below the figure.
3. Place an initial protective stop 20 pips above the round number.
4. When the position is profitable by the amount that you risked, close half of the

    position and move your stop on the remaining portion of the trade to breakeven.
    Trail your stop as the price moves in your favor.

Market Conditions

This strategy works best when the move happens in quieter market conditions
without the influence of major reports. It is more successful for currency pairs with
tighter trading ranges, crosses, and commodity currencies. This strategy also works
in the majors but under quieter market conditions since the stop loss is relatively
tight.

Further Optimization

Round numbers are important because they are significant levels but if the price
coincides with a key technical level, a reversal becomes more likely. This means the
strategy has an even higher probability of success when other important support or
resistance levels converge at the figure. This can be caused by moving averages, key
Fibonacci levels or Bollinger Bands, or other technical indicators.

Examples                                                                                   113

Now let's take a look at some of the examples of this strategy in action. The first        TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: FADING THE DOUBLE ZEROS
example that we will go over is a 15-minute chart of USDJPY shown in Figure 10.1.
According to the rules of the strategy, we can see that on April 24, USDJPY was
trading above its 20-period moving. Prices continued to move higher with the
currency pair drifting toward 120.00, our double zero level. In accordance with the
rules, we place an entry order a few pips below the round number at 1110.85. Our
order is triggered, and we put our stop 20 above the figure at 120.20. USDJPY
climbs to a high of 120.08 before turning lower. We close half of the position when
it moves by the amount risked or 35 pips at 1110.50. Notice that USDJPY falls and
then rallies again before hitting our initial profit target. When the first profit target
is reached, the stop on the remaining half of the position is moved to breakeven or
our initial entry price of 1110.85.

   We then proceed to trail stop. The trailing stop can be done using a variety of
methods including a monetary or percentage basis. We choose to trail the stop by
two-bar low for a really short-term trade and end up getting out of the other half of
the position at 1110.50 as well, earning us 35 pips on the first and second half of the
positions.

   The next chart that we want to look at is GBPUSD. What's interesting about
Figure 10.2 is that there are a number of examples. In the first example, labeled ``1,''
TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: FADING THE DOUBLE ZEROSFIGURE 10.1 USDJPY 15-Minute Chart
                                  Source: eSignal

114

                               FIGURE 10.2 GBPUSD 15-Minute Chart
                                  Source: eSignal
we can see that GBP/USD was trading above its 20-period moving average on a                         TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: FADING THE DOUBLE ZEROS
15-minute chart and headed for 1.55. According to our rules, we place an order to
sell at 1.5485 (the high on this move was 1.5492) with a stop at 1.5520 for 35-pip
risk. GBPUSD moves in our favor, and our first profit target is hit at (1.5485 Ł.0035)
at 1.5450. We then move our stop to breakeven, or our initial entry price of 1.5485,
and proceed to trail it by the 20-day SMA + 10 pips. If we manage our trade using
this type of trailing stop, the second half of the position would have been exited
at 1.5350 for 35 pips on the first half of the position and 135 pips on the second.
Part of the reason why this trade was so successful is because the 1.5500 is also
a significant technical level. Example ``2'' is a long trail that reversed but not by
enough to hit the profit target. Example ``3'' is a successful long trade that hit the first
profit target.

   Making sure that the double zero level is a significant level is a key element of
filtering for good trades. The last example shown in Figure 10.3 is USDCAD on a
15-minute chart. The great thing about this trade is that it is triple zero level rather
than just a double zero level. Triple zero levels hold even more significance than a
double zero level because of their less frequent occurrence. In Figure 10.3, we see
that USDCAD is also trading well below its 20-period moving average and heading
toward 1.2000. We look to go long 15 pips above the double zero level at 1.2015.

                                                                                                 115

FIGURE 10.3 USDCAD 15-Minute Chart
Source: eSignal
                          We place our stop 20 pips below the round number at 1.1980. The currency pair
                          hits a low of 1.2011 before moving higher. We then sell half of our positions when
                          the currency pair rallies by the amount that we risked at 1.2050. The stop on the
                          remaining half of the position is then moved to breakeven at 1.2015. We proceed
                          to trail the stop once again by the two-bar low and end up exiting the second half
                          of the position at 1.2055. As a result, we earned 35 pips on the first position and
                          40 pips on the second position.

116

TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: FADING THE DOUBLE ZEROS
                                                                CHAPTER 11

Technical Trading
Strategy: Waiting
for the Deal

                                                                                                  117

The lack of volume data in the FX market has forced day traders to develop
     different strategies that rely less on the level of demand and more on the micro
structure of the market. One of the most common characteristics that day traders
try to exploit is the market's 24-hour round-the-clock nature. Although the market
is open for trading throughout the course of the day, the extent of market activity
during each trading session can vary significantly. Traditionally, trading tends to be
the quietest during the Asian market hours as we indicated in Chapter 4. This means
that currencies such as the EURUSD and GBPUSD tend to trade within a very
tight range during these hours. According to the Bank of International Settlement's
Triennial FX Survey published in September of 2014, the United Kingdom is the
most active trading center, capturing 41% of total volume. Adding in Germany,
France, Italy, and Switzerland, European trading as a whole accounts for 50% of
total FX trading. The United States, on the other hand, is only second to the
United Kingdom for the title of most active trading center, but that amounts to only
approximately 19% of total turnover. This makes the London open exceptionally
important because it gives the majority of traders in the market an opportunity
to take advantage of events or announcements that may have occurred during
late U.S. trading or overnight Asian sessions. This becomes even more critical on
                                                  days when the FOMC meets to discuss and announce monetary policy because the

                                                  announcement occurs at 2:15pm NY Time, after the London close.

                                                  The British pound trades most actively against the U.S. dollar during the European

                                                  and London trading hours. There is also active trading during the U.S./European

                                                  overlap, but outside those time frames, the pair tends to trade relatively lightly

                                                  because the majority of GBPUSD trading is done through UK and European market

                                                  makers. This provides a great opportunity for day traders to capture the initial

                                                  directional intraday real move that occurs within the first few hours of London

                                                  trading. This strategy exploits the common perception that UK traders are notorious

                                                  stop hunters. This means that the initial movement at the London open may not

                                                  always be the real one. Since UK and European dealers are the primary market

                                                  makers for the GBPUSD, they have tremendous insight into the extent of actual

                                                  supply and demand for the pair. The ``waiting for the real deal'' trading strategy

                                                  first sets up when interbank dealing desks survey their books at the onset of trading

                                                  and use their client data to trigger close stops on both sides of the markets to gain

                                                  the pip differential. Once these stops are taken out and the books are cleared, the

                                                  real directional move in the GBPUSD will begin to occur, at which point we look

                                                  for the rules of this strategy to be met before entering into a long or short position.

                                                  This strategy works best following the U.S. open or after a major economic release.

                                                  With this strategy, you are looking for the noise in the markets to settle before

118                                               trading the real trend of the day.

TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: WAITING FOR THE DEAL   Strategy Rules

                                                                 Longs:

                                                                 1. Early European trading in GBPUSD begins around 1am NY Time, and we look
                                                                     for the pair to make new range low of at least 25 pips above the opening price
                                                                     (the range is defined as the price action between the Frankfurt and London
                                                                     power hour of 6 GMT to 7 GMT NY Time).

                                                                 2. Look for the pair to reverse and penetrate the high.
                                                                 3. Place an entry order to buy 10 pips above the high of the range.
                                                                 4. Place a protective stop no more than 25 pips away from your range high, or 35

                                                                     pips.
                                                                 5. If the position moves lower by 50 pips, close half of the position, move stop on

                                                                     rest to breakeven, and target three times risk, or 105 pips on the remainder.

                                                                 Shorts:
                                                                 1. GBPUSD opens in Europe and trades more than 25 pips above the high

                                                                     established during the Frankfurt to London power hour.
                                                                 2. Wait for the pair to reverse and penetrate the low.
3. When that occurs, place an entry order to sell 10 pips below the low of the                      TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: WAITING FOR THE DEAL
    range.

4. Place a protective stop no more than 25 pips away from your range low, or 35
    pips.

5. If the position moves lower by 50 pips, close half of the position, move stop on
    rest to breakeven, and target three times risk, or 105 pips on the remainder.

Examples
Now let's take a look at some examples of this strategy in action. Figure 11.1 is
a textbook example of the ``waiting for the real deal'' strategy. Between 6 and 7
GMT, the range high and low for GBPUSD are 1.5359 and 1.5234, respectively. At
the start of the London trading session, we see GBPUSD squeeze upwards, taking
out the range high of 1.5359. At the time, we place an order to sell GBPUSD 10
pips below the range low at 1.5324. The entry is triggered about an hour and a half
later. The protective stop is placed 25 pips above the range low (35 pips total) at
1.5359. A take profit on half of the position is placed at 1.5274, or 50 pips below
the entry price. The stop on the remainder of the position is moved to breakeven
or 1.5324. The second half of the position is exited at three times risk at 1.5219
shortly after the NY open.

                                                                                                 119

FIGURE 11.1 GBPUSD 5-Minute Chart
Source: eSignal
TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: WAITING FOR THE DEALFIGURE 11.2 GBPUSD 10-Minute Chart
                                  Source: eSignal

120

                               FIGURE 11.3 GBPUSD 15-Minute Chart
                                  Source: eSignal
   The next example is shown in Figure 11.2. In this example, the range high and
low established between 6 and 7 GMT are 1.5433 and 1.5399, respectively. At the
start of the London trading session, we see GBPUSD squeeze upward, taking out
the range high of 1.5433 and racing all the way to 1.5492. At the time, we place an
order to sell GBPUSD 10 pips below the range low at 1.5389. The entry is triggered
around the NY open. The protective stop is placed 25 pips above the range low (35
pips total) at 1.5424. A take profit on half of the position is placed at 1.5339, or 50
pips below the entry price. The stop on the remainder of the position is moved to
breakeven or 1.5389. The second half of the position is exited at three times risk at
1.5284 after the London open on the following trading day.

   The third example is shown in Figure 11.3. In this example, the range during the
Frankfurt London power hour is 1.5187 and 1.5139. At the start of the London
trading session, GBPUSD drips lower, breaking below the range low and trading
down to 1.5105. When the range low is broken, we place an order to buy GBPUSD
10 pips below the range high at 1.5197. The entry is triggered around the NY open.
The protective stop is placed 25 pips below the range high (35 pips total) at 1.5172.
A take profit on half of the position is placed at 1.5247, or 50 pips below the entry
price. The stop on the remainder of the position is moved to breakeven or 1.5197.
The second exit is not shown in the chart in Figure 11.3, but the breakeven stop is
triggered.

                                                                                                 121

TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: WAITING FOR THE DEAL
                                                                CHAPTER 12

Technical Trading
Strategy: Inside
Days Breakout Play

                                                                                                  123

Throughout this book, volatility trading has been discussed as one of the most
     popular strategies employed by professional traders. There are many ways to
interpret changes in volatilities, but one of the simplest strategies is actually a visual
one that requires nothing more than a keen eye. Although this is a strategy that is
very popular in the world of professional trading, new traders are frequently amazed
by its ease, accuracy, and reliability. Breakout traders can identify inside days with
nothing more than a basic candlestick chart.

   An inside day is defined as a day where the daily range has been contained within
the prior day's trading range, or in other words, the day's high and low do not
exceed the previous day's high and low. There needs to be at least two inside days
before the volatility play can be implemented. The more inside days, the higher the
likelihood of an upside surge in volatility, or a breakout. This type of strategy is best
employed on daily charts, but the longer the time frame, the more significant the
breakout opportunity. Some traders use the inside day strategy on hourly charts,
which works to some success, but identifying inside days on daily charts tends to
lead to an even greater probability of success. For day traders looking for inside days
on hourly charts, chances of a solid breakout increases if the contraction precedes
the London or U.S. market opens. The key is to predict a valid breakout and not
get caught in a false breakout move. Traders using the daily charts could look for
                                                       breakouts ahead of major economic releases for the specific currency pair. This
                                                       strategy works with all currencies pairs, but has less frequent instances of false
                                                       breakouts in the tighter range pairs such as the EURGBP, USDCAD, EURCHF,
                                                       EURCAD, and AUDCAD.

                                                        Strategy Rules

                                                       Long:

                                                       1. Identify a currency pair where the daily range has been contained within the
                                                           prior day's range for at least two days (we are looking for multiple inside days).

                                                       2. Buy 10 pips above the high of the previous inside day.
                                                       3. Place stop and reverse order for two lots at least 10 pips below the low of the

                                                           nearest inside day.
                                                       4. Take profit when prices reach double the amount risked or begin to trail stop

                                                           at that level.

                                                          Protect against false breakouts: If the stop and reverse order is triggered, place a stop
                                                       at least 10 pips above the high of the nearest inside day and protect any profits larger
                                                       than what you risked with a trailing stop.

124                                                    Short:

TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: INSIDE DAYS BREAKOUT PLAY  1. Identify a currency pair where the daily range has been contained within the

                                                       prior day's range for at least two days (we are looking for multiple inside days).

                                                       2. Sell 10 pips below the low of the previous inside day.

                                                       3. Place stop and reverse order for two lots at least 10 pips above the high of the

                                                       nearest inside day.

                                                       4. Take profit when prices reach double the amount risked or begin to trail stop

                                                       at that level.

                                                          Protect against false breakouts: If the stop and reverse order is triggered, place a stop
                                                       at least 10 pips below the low of the nearest inside day and protect any profits larger
                                                       than what you risked with a trailing stop.

                                                       Further Optimization

                                                       For higher-probability trades, technical formations can be used in conjunction with
                                                       the visual identification to place a higher weight on a specific direction of the
                                                       breakout. For example, if the inside days are building and contracting toward the
                                                       top of a recent range such as a bullish ascending triangle formation, the breakout has
                                                       a higher likelihood of occurring to the upside. The opposite scenario is also true; if
                                                       inside days are building and contracting toward the bottom of a recent range and
                                                       we begin to see that a bearish descending triangle is forming, the breakout has a
higher likelihood of occurring to the downside. Aside from triangles, other technical            TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: INSIDE DAYS BREAKOUT PLAY
factors that can be considered include significant support and resistance levels. For
example, if there are significant Fibonacci and moving average support zones resting
below the inside day levels, this either supports a higher likelihood of an upside
breakout or at least a higher probability of a false breakout to the downside.

Examples
Let us take a look at a few examples. Figure 12.1 is a daily chart of euro against the
British pound, or the EURGBP. The two inside days are identified on the chart, and
it is clear visually that each of those days' ranges, which includes the high and low, is
contained within the previous day's range. In accordance with our rules, we place
an order to go long 10 pips above the high on the previous inside at 0.6634 and an
order to sell 10 pips below the low of the previous inside day at 0.6579. Our long
order gets triggered two bars after the most recent inside day. We then proceed
to place a stop and reverse order 10 pips below the low of the most recent inside
day at 0.6579. So basically, we went long at 0.6634 with a stop at 0.6579, which
means that we are risking 45 pips. When prices reached our target level of double
the amount risked (90 pips), or 0.6724, we have two choices: to either close out the
entire trade or begin trailing the stop. More conservative traders should probably
square positions at this point, while more aggressive traders could look for more 125

                                                                       0.6724 Hit
                                                                      on This Day

                                                                                      Breaks High
                                                                                      of Previous
                                                                                       Inside Day
                                                                          Inside
                                                                          Days

FIGURE 12.1 EURGBP Inside Day Chart
Source: eSignal
                                                                Inside Days

                                                                                    Stop and Reverse
                                                                                    Order Triggered

                                                       Stop moved to
                                                       Breakeven
                                                       @0.6560

                                                       FIGURE 12.2 NZDUSD Inside Day Chart
                                                       Source: eSignal

126                                                    profit potential. We choose to close out the trade for a 90-pip profit, but those who

TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: INSIDE DAYS BREAKOUT PLAY  stayed in and weathered a bit of volatility could have taken advantage of another 100

                                                       pips of profits three weeks later.

                                                       Figure 12.2 is another example of inside day trading using the daily chart of

                                                       the New Zealand dollar against the U.S. dollar (or the NZDUSD). The difference

                                                       between this example and the previous one is that our stop and reverse order

                                                       actually gets triggered, indicating that the first move was a false breakout. The two

                                                       inside days are labeled on the chart. In accordance with our rules, after identifying

                                                       the inside days, we place an order to buy on the break of the high of the previous

                                                       inside day and an order to sell on the break of the low of the previous inside day.

                                                       The high on the first or previous inside day is 0.6628. This means we place an order

                                                       to go long at 0.6638 or to go short at 0.6618. Our long order gets triggered on

                                                       the first day of the break at 0.6638, and we place a stop and reverse order 10 pips

                                                       below the low of most recent inside day (or the daily candle before the breakout),

                                                       which is 0.6560. However, instead of continuing the breakout, the pair reverses

                                                       and we close our first position at 0.6560 with a 78 pips loss. We then enter into a

                                                       new short position with the reverse order at 0.6560. The new stop is then 10 pips

                                                       above the high of the most recent inside day at 0.6619. When NZDUSD moves by

                                                       double the initial amount risked, conservative traders can take profit on the entire

                                                       position while aggressive traders can trail the stop using various methods that might

                                                       depend on how wide the trading range is. In this example, since the daily trading
                                                                                                   Trade Exited  TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGY: INSIDE DAYS BREAKOUT PLAY

                                                                                  Inside Days

                                                                                                        Trade
                                                                                                        Triggered

FIGURE 12.3 EURCAD Inside Day Chart
Source: eSignal

range is fairly wide, we choose to close the position once the price reaches our limit 127
of 0.6404 for a profit of 156 pips and a total profit on the entire trade of 78 pips.

   The last example uses technicals to help determine a directional bias of the inside
day breakout. Figure 12.3 is a daily chart of EURCAD. The inside days are once
again identified directly on the chart. The presence of higher lows suggests that the
breakout could very well be to the upside. Adding in the MACD histogram to the
bottom of the chart, we see that the histogram is also in positive territory right when
the inside days are forming. As such, we choose to opt for an upside breakout trade.
In accordance with the rules, we go long 10 pips above the high of the previous
inside day at 1.6008. Our long trade is triggered, and we place our stop and reverse
order 10 pips below the low of the most recent inside day at 1.5905. When prices
move by double the amount that we risked to 1.6208, we exit the entire position
for a 200-pip profit.

   With the inside day breakout strategy, the risk is generally pretty high if done
on daily charts, but the profit potentials following the breakout are usually fairly
large as well. More aggressive traders can also trade more than one position, which
would allow them to lock in profits on the first half of the position when prices
move by double the amount risked and then trail the stop on the remaining position.
Generally these breakout trades are a precursor to big trends, and using trailing
stops would allow traders to participate in the trend move while also banking
some profits.
