                                                                CHAPTER 17

Fundamental
Trading Strategy:
Pairing Strong with
Weak

                                                                                                  149

One of the best ways to approach currency trading on a fundamental basis
      is to pair the strongest currency with the weakest. Of course finding that
pairing is rarely simple because it is not just about which countries are the strongest
or weakest right now but instead which ones will become strong or weak going
forward. Finding these currencies can also be challenging because we live in a global
economy where the health of one major economy will affect the outlook of another.
Yet buying a weak currency and selling a strong one unknowingly can be a big
mistake that translates into large losses, so it is extremely important for forex traders
to learn how to pair strong with weak to maximize returns. After doing so you can
use technical analysis to help identify points of entry in the direction of the trend.

   In 2015, for example, the European Central Bank introduced quantitative easing
(QE) as a last ditch effort to boost inflation and stimulate growth. We know that
QE lowers interest rates and erodes the value of a currency but selling euros blindly
on March 9, 2015, when the central bank started buying bonds for the very first
time, yielded only a short-lived decline in the currency. Instead it would have been
smarter to look for opportunities to sell the currency against a strong one on rallies.
FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: PAIRING STRONG WITH WEAKFIGURE 17.1 EURGBP Daily Chart--Quantitative Easing
                                  Source: eSignal

150

                               FIGURE 17.2 NZDCAD Daily Chart--Oil
                                  Source: eSignal
One good candidate at the time was the British pound, which was benefiting from                     FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: PAIRING STRONG WITH WEAK
economic improvements and had a central bank that was moving closer to raising
rates. Figure 17.1 shows how there was a lot of consolidation in EURGBP near
74 cents prior to the launch of Eurozone quantitative easing. This level proved to
be resistance when the pair rallied in late March. Traders could have sold them,
assuming that resistance would hold, or waited for the pair to revisit that level in
April and May.

   Another way to pair strong with weak is to follow the direction of commodity
prices. Oil prices bottomed at $43.46 in early 2015, having traded above $100 a
barrel only 8 months earlier and started to turn higher in March. As a major oil
producer, Canada would stand to benefit from stabilization in crude prices. At the
time U.S. policy makers were talking about raising interest rates, the Australian
dollar was benefitting from improving domestic conditions, and sterling soared on
positive data and a victory by the incumbent during the 2015 general election.
Selling any of these currencies and buying the Canadian dollar would have been a
risky endeavor. Instead the best bet at the time was to sell the New Zealand dollar
and buy the Canadian dollar or the NZDCAD pair because New Zealand reported
extremely weak labor data that prompted policy makers to talk about easing. As
you can see in Figure 17.2, NZDCAD started to turn lower just as oil prices moved
higher in March.

                                                                                                 151

FIGURE 17.3 EURUSD Daily Chart
Source: eSignal
                             The best way to gauge strong versus weak is to monitor economic data surprises.
                          While the ECB was buying bonds and implementing quantitative easing, Eurozone
                          data started to improve and U.S. data started to weaken. The market had not
                          anticipated this shift in dynamic as they had been looking for weak Eurozone data to
                          reinforce QE and stronger U.S. data to push the Fed to tighten. This unexpected
                          change drove EURUSD sharply higher, and buying breakouts in April and May as
                          shown in Figure 17.3 would have been good bets.

152

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: PAIRING STRONG WITH WEAK
                                                                CHAPTER 18

Fundamental
Trading Strategy:
The Leveraged
Carry Trade

                                                                                                  153

The leverage carry trade strategy is the quintessential global macro trade that
     has long been one of the favorite strategies of hedge funds and investment
banks. On its most fundamental level, the carry trade strategy involves buying
a high-yielding currency and funding it with the sale of a low-yielding currency.
Aggressive speculators will leave the trade unhedged with the hope that the high
yielding currency will appreciate in value relative to the lower yielding currency,
allowing them to earn the interest rate differential on top of the capital appreciation.
More conservative investors may choose to hedge the exchange rate component,
earning only the interest rate differential. Although the differentials tend to be small,
usually 1 to 3 percent if the position is leveraged 5 to 10 times, the profits from
interest rates alone can be substantial. Of course it is important to remember that
while leverage can magnify profits, it can also exacerbate losses. Capital appreciation
generally occurs when a number of traders identify profit opportunities and pile into
the same trade, driving up the value of the currency pair.

   In foreign exchange trading, the carry trade is a popular way to take advantage
of the notion that money flows in and out of different markets, driven by the law
of supply and demand: with markets offering higher rates of return on investment
                                                         attracting the most capital. Countries are no different--in the world of international
                                                         capital flows, nations that offer the highest interest rates will generally attract more
                                                         investment creating greater demand for their currencies. This helps to fuel the
                                                         carry trade. The carry trade strategy is simple to master, but like all strategies,
                                                         it contains risk. Carry trades performed extremely well between 2000 and 2007,
                                                         failed miserably between 2008 and 2009, and recovered between late 2012 into
                                                         2015. The chance of loss can be great if you do not understand how, why, and when
                                                         carry trades work best.

                                                          How Do Carry Trades Work?

                                                         To understand carry trading, it is important to first understand that currencies are

                                                         always traded in pairs, so taking a carry trade involves buying a currency that offers

                                                         a high interest rate and simultaneously selling a currency that offers a low interest

                                                         rate. Carry trades are profitable when the exchange rate remains unchanged in

                                                         value and investors are able to earn the difference in interest--or spread--between

                                                         the two currencies, or when it appreciates in value, allowing the investor to earn

                                                         the spread along with capital appreciation. If the exchange rate falls by more than

                                                         the spread on the interest rate, it becomes a net loss for the investor.

154                                                      Let's take a look at an example: Assume that the Australian dollar offers an

                                                         interest rate of 4.75%, while the Swiss franc offers an interest rate of 0.25%. To

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: THE LEVERAGED CARRY TRADE  execute the carry trade, an investor buys the Australian dollar and sells the Swiss

                                                         franc. In doing so, he or she can earn a profit of 4.50% (2.75% in interest earned

                                                         minus 0.25% in interest paid), as long as the exchange rate between Australian

                                                         dollars and Swiss francs do not change. Figure 18.1 shows exactly how an investor

                                                         would execute the carry trade.

                                                           Long                   Investor            Short

                                                         Buy AUD  Enters long AUD/USD trade:        Sell CHF
                                                           4.75%                                     0.25%
                                                                  Receives: 4.75% from long AUD
                                                                  position

                                                                  Pays: 0.25% through short USD
                                                                  funding position

                                                                  Profit: 4.50% in interest rate
                                                                  spread, assuming spot rate is
                                                                  constant

                                                         FIGURE 18.1 Leveraged Carry Trade Example
                  To summarize: A carry trade involves buying a currency that offers a high interest    FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: THE LEVERAGED CARRY TRADE
               rate while selling a currency that offers a low interest rate.

 Why Do Carry Trades Work?

               Interest rates are very important: Carry trades work because of the constant
               movement of capital into and out of different countries in search of the highest yield.
               Interest rates are the main reason why some countries attract more investment
               than others. There are three reasons why a country can pay a higher interest rate.
               First, if a country's economy is doing well (high growth, high productivity, low
               unemployment, rising incomes, etc.), it will be able to offer those who invest in the
               country a higher rate of return. Second, central banks can raise interest rates on fast
               growing economies with rising inflation. Third, countries with high debt to GDP
               ratios, low credit ratings, and/or inherent growth problems may also need to pay a
               higher interest rate to attract investment.

                  Investors prefer to earn higher interest rates: Investors who are interested in
               maximizing their profits will naturally look for investments that offer them the
               highest rate of return. When making a decision to invest in a particular currency, an
               investor is more likely to choose one that offers the highest rate of return, or in this
               case, interest rate. If several investors make this exact same decision, the country 155
               will experience an inflow of capital from those seeking to earn a high rate of return,
               and the currency should appreciate.

                  What about countries that are not doing well economically? Countries that have
               low growth and low productivity will not be able to offer investors a high rate of
               return unless they have a very poor credit rating and are forced to offer a higher
               rate to compensate for the risk of holding the country's bond or currency. With
               major economies, however, there will be times where growth is so weak that
               interest rates are brought to zero, providing investors with no meaningful return.
               The difference between countries that offer high interest rates versus countries that
               offer low interest rates is what makes carry trades possible.

                  Let's take another look at the carry trade example above in more detail.
                  Imagine an investor in Switzerland who is earning an interest rate of 0.25% per
               year on her bank deposit in Swiss francs. At the time, a bank in Australia is offering
               4.75% per year on a deposit of Australian dollars. Seeing that interest rates are much
               higher with the Australian bank, this investor would like to find a way to earn this
               higher rate of interest on her money.
                  Now imagine that the investor could somehow trade her deposit of Swiss francs
               by paying 0.25% for a deposit of Australian dollars paying 4.75%. What she has
               effectively done is to ``sell'' her Swiss franc deposit and use those funds to ``buy'' an
               Australian dollar deposit. With this transaction, she now owns an Australian dollar
                                                         Value   Australia              Capital                  Switzerland     Value
                                                           of                           Flows                                      of
                                                                Interest rate:                                   Interest rate:
                                                         AUD        4.75%                                            0.25%       CHF

                                                         FIGURE 18.2 AUDCHF Carry Trade Example 1

                                                         deposit that pays her 4.75% in interest per year, 4.50% more than she was earning

                                                         with her Swiss franc deposit.

                                                         This investor has essentially just done a carry trade by ``buying'' an Australian

                                                         dollar deposit, and ``selling'' a Swiss franc deposit.

                                                         The net effect of millions of people doing this transaction is that capital flows out of

                                                         Switzerland and into Australia, as investors take their Swiss francs and convert them

                                                         into Australian dollars. Australia attracts more capital because of the higher rates it

                                                         offers. This inflow of capital increases the value of the currency (see Figure 18.2).

                                                         To summarize: Carry trades are made possible by the differences in interest rates

                                                         between countries. Because they prefer to earn higher interest rates, investors will

156                                                      look to buy and hold high interest rate paying currencies.

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: THE LEVERAGED CARRY TRADE   When Will Carry Trades Work Best?

                                                                        There will be times when carry trades work better than others. In fact, carry trades
                                                                        are the most profitable when there is a very specific attitude toward risk.

                                                          How Much Risk Are You Willing to Take?

                                                                        The moods of people in general change over time--sometimes they may feel more
                                                                        daring and willing to take chances; other times they may be more timid and prone to
                                                                        conservativeness. Investors, as a group, are no different. Sometimes they are willing
                                                                        to make investments that involve a good amount of risk; other times they are more
                                                                        fearful of losses and look to invest in safer assets.

                                                                           In financial jargon, when investors as a whole are willing to take on risk, we
                                                                        call this low risk aversion, which means they are in risk-seeking mode. Alternatively,
                                                                        when investors are drawn to more conservative investments and less willing to take
                                                                        on risk, we describe them as risk-averse.

                                                                           Carry trades are the most profitable when investors have low risk aversion. This
                                                                        notion makes sense when you consider what a carry trade involves. Remember, a
               carry trade involves buying a currency that pays a high interest rate while selling a    FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: THE LEVERAGED CARRY TRADE
               currency that pays a low interest rate. In buying the high interest rate currency, the
               investor is taking a risk because it is believed that a country needs to offer a higher
               interest rate to offset the risk of holding the currency. Also, while high interest rates
               attract investment, they can also hurt growth by raising the cost of borrowing. This
               creates uncertainty around whether the economy of the country will continue to
               perform well and be able to pay not just high but even higher interest rates. This
               risk is something a carry trade investor must be willing to take.

                  If investors as a whole were not willing to take on this risk, then capital would
               never move from one country to another, and the carry trade opportunity would
               not exist. Therefore, in order to return, carry trades require that investors as a
               group have low risk aversion, or be willing to bear the risk of investing in the higher
               interest rate currency.

                  To summarize: Carry trades will be the most profitable when investors are willing
               to bear the risk of investing in high interest paying currencies.

 When Will Carry Trades Not Work?

               So far, we have shown that a carry trade will work best when investors have low
               risk aversion. What happens when investors have high risk aversion?

                  Carry trades are the least profitable when investors have high risk aversion. When 157
               investors have high risk aversion, they are less willing as a group to take chances
               with their investments. This means they would be less willing to invest in riskier
               currencies that offer higher interest rates. Instead, when investors have high risk
               aversion they would actually prefer to put their money in ``safe haven'' currencies
               that pay lower interest rates. During this time, they may also opt to close or unwind
               their carry trades. In doing so, they would be buying the currency with the low
               interest rate and selling the currency with the high interest rate.

                  Returning to our earlier example, let's assume the investor suddenly feels
               uncomfortable holding the foreign currency, the Australian dollar. Now, instead of
               looking for the higher interest rate, she is more interested in keeping her investment
               safe. As a result, she swaps her Australian dollars for more familiar Swiss francs.

                  The net effect of millions of people doing this transaction is that capital flows
               out of Australia and into Switzerland as investors take their Australian dollars and
               convert them into Swiss francs. During this period of risk aversion, Switzerland
               attracts more capital due to the perceived safety of its currency, and the inflow of
               capital increases the value of the Swiss franc (see Figure18.3).

                  When investors have high risk aversion, they prefer to avoid the riskier high
               interest rate paying currency and instead invest in the safer, lower interest rate
               paying currency, which is the opposite of a carry trade.
                                                         Value          Australia      Capital     Switzerland                  Value
                                                           of                          Flows                                      of
                                                                       Interest rate:              Interest rate:
                                                         AUD               4.75%                       0.25%                    CHF

                                                         FIGURE 18.3 AUDCHF Carry Trade Example 2

                                                            To summarize: Carry trades will be the least profitable in periods of uncertainty
                                                         when investors are unwilling to bear the risk of investing in high interest paying
                                                         currencies.

                                                          The Importance of Risk Aversion

                                                         Carry trades will generally be profitable when investors have low risk aversion, and

                                                         unprofitable when investors have high risk aversion. So before placing a carry trade

                                                         it is important to understand the risk environment--whether investors as a whole

                                                         have high or low risk aversion--and when it changes.

158                                                      Rising risk aversion is generally beneficial for low interest rate paying currencies:

                                                         Sometimes the mood of investors will change rapidly, and investors' willingness

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: THE LEVERAGED CARRY TRADE  to make risky trades can change dramatically from one moment to the next.

                                                         Often, these large shifts are caused by significant global events. When periods

                                                         of risk aversion occur quickly, the result is generally a large capital inflow into

                                                         low-interest-rate-paying ``safe haven'' currencies (see Figure 18.2).

                                                         For example, in the summer of 1998 the Japanese yen appreciated against the

                                                         dollar by more than 20% over the span of two months, due to the Russian debt

                                                         crisis and LTCM hedge fund bailout. Similarly, just after the September 11 terrorist

                                                         attacks the Swiss franc rose by more than 7% against the dollar over a 10-day period.

                                                         During the global financial crisis in 2008, we also saw big gains in the yen and the

                                                         Swiss franc.

                                                         These sharp movements in currency values often occur when risk aversion quickly

                                                         changes from low to high. As a result, when risk aversion shifts, a carry trade can

                                                         turn from being profitable to unprofitable very quickly.

                                                         Risk Aversion and Carry Trade Profitability

                                                         As investor risk aversion goes from high to low, carry trades become more profitable
                                                         as detailed in Figure 18.4.

                                                            How do you know if investors as a whole have high or low risk aversion?
                                                         Unfortunately, it is difficult to measure investor risk aversion with a single number.
Carry Trade Profitability              Risk                                     (+)
               (Ł)                     Neutral
                                                Low Risk Aversion
High Risk Aversion
                                                1. Investors more willing to
1. Investors less willing to                    take greater risks
take risks, remove funds                        2. Capital flows away from
from risky currencies                           low-interest currencies and
2. Capital flows out of riskier                 into those that pay higher
high-interest currencies and                    interest rates
into low interest safe-haven                    3. Low-interest currencies
currencies                                      tend to remain weak, used in
3. Low-interest currencies                      financing risky trades
appreciate as investors get
out of risky trades

FIGURE 18.4 Carry Trade Profitability

One way to get a broad idea of risk aversion levels is to look at bond yields. The                  FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: THE LEVERAGED CARRY TRADE
wider the spread between the yields of bonds from different countries with similar
credit ratings, the higher the investor risk aversion. Bond yields are readily available
on major financial websites such as Bloomberg.com and Reuters.com. In addition,
several large banks have developed their own measures of risk aversion that signal
when investors are willing to take risk and when they are not.

                                                                                                 159
Other Things to Bear in Mind When Considering a Carry Trade

While risk aversion is one of the most important things to consider before making
a carry trade, it is not the only one. The following are some additional issues to be
aware of.

Low Interest Rate Currency Appreciation

By entering into a carry trade, an investor is able to earn a profit from the interest
rate difference, or spread, between a high interest rate currency and a low interest
rate currency. However, the carry trade can turn unprofitable if for some reason
(like the risk aversion examples earlier), the low interest rate currency appreciates
by a significant amount.

   Aside from rising risk aversion, improving economic conditions within a low
interest paying country can also cause its currency to appreciate. An ideal carry trade
will involve a low interest currency whose economy is weak and has low expectations
for growth. If the economy were to improve, however, the country might then be
able to offer investors a higher rate of return through increased interest rates. If this
were to occur--again, using the previous example, say that Switzerland increased
the interest rates it offered--then investors may take advantage of these higher rates
by investing in Swiss francs. As seen in Figure 18.3, an appreciation of the Swiss franc
                                                         would negatively affect the profitability of the Australian dollarŁSwiss franc carry
                                                         trade. (At the very least, higher interest rates in Switzerland would negatively affect
                                                         the carry trade's profitability by lowering the interest rate spread.)

                                                            This same sequence of events may currently be unfolding for the Japanese yen.
                                                         Given its zero interest rates, the Japanese yen has for a very long time been an
                                                         ideal low interest rate currency to use in carry trades (known as yen carry trades).
                                                         This situation however, may be changing. Increased optimism about the Japanese
                                                         economy has recently led to an increase in the Japanese stock market. Increased
                                                         investor demand for Japanese stocks and currency has caused the yen to appreciate,
                                                         and this yen appreciation negatively affects the profitability of carry trades like
                                                         Australian dollar (high interest rate) versus Japanese yen.

                                                            If investors continue to buy the yen, the yen carry trade could start to become
                                                         unprofitable. This further illustrates the fact that when the low interest rate currency
                                                         in a carry trade (the currency being sold) appreciates, it negatively affects the
                                                         profitability of the overall carry trade position.

                                                         Trade Balances

                                                         A country's trade balance (the difference between imports and exports) can also

                                                         affect the profitability of a carry trade. We know that when investors have low

160                                                      risk aversion or are risk seeking, capital will flow from the low interest rate paying

                                                         currency to the high interest rate paying currency (see Figure 18.2) but this does

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: THE LEVERAGED CARRY TRADE  not always happen.

                                                         One reason is because countries with large trade surplus can still see their

                                                         currencies appreciate in low risk environments because running a trade surplus

                                                         means that the country exports more than it imports. This creates naturally demand

                                                         for the currency.

                                                         The point of this example is to show that even when investors have low risk

                                                         aversion, large trade imbalances can cause a low interest rate currency to appreciate

                                                         (as in Figure 18.3). And when the low interest rate currency in a carry trade (the

                                                         currency being sold) appreciates, it negatively affects the profitability of the carry

                                                         trade.

                                                         Time Horizon

                                                         In general, a carry trade is a long-term strategy. Before entering into a carry trade,
                                                         an investor should be willing to commit to a time-horizon of at least six months. This
                                                         commitment helps to make sure that the trade will not be affected by the ``noise''
                                                         of shorter-term currency price movements.

                                                            To summarize: Carry trade investors should be aware of factors such as currency
                                                         appreciation, trade balances, and time horizon before placing a trade. Any or all of
                                                         these factors can cause a seemingly profitable carry trade to become unprofitable.
                                                                CHAPTER 19

Fundamental
Trading Strategy:
Macro Event Driven
Trade

                                                                                                  161

Short-term traders are generally focused only on the economic release of the
   week and how it will impact their day trading activities. This works well for
many traders, but it is also important not to lose sight of the big macro events
that may be brewing in the economy or the world for that matter. Large-scale
macroeconomic events will move markets and will move them in very big ways.
Their impact goes beyond a simple one- or two-day price change because depending
on their size and scope, these occurrences have the potential to reshape the
fundamental perception toward a currency for months or even years at a time.
Events such as wars, political uncertainly, natural disasters, and major international
meetings or monetary policy changes are so potent due to their irregularity that they
can have widespread psychological and physical impacts on the currency market.
With these events come both currencies that appreciate vastly and currencies that
depreciate just as dramatically. Therefore, keeping on top of global developments,
understanding the underlying direction of market sentiment before and after these
events occur and anticipating them could be very profitable, or at least can help
prevent significant losses.
                                                         Know When Big Events Occur: Here Is a List
                                                           of a Few Important Ones

                                                                        Significant G7 finance ministers meetings
                                                                        Presidential elections
                                                                        Important summits
                                                                        Major Central Bank meetings
                                                                        Potential changes to currency regimes
                                                                        Possible debt defaults by large countries
                                                                        Possible wars as a result of rising geopolitical tensions
                                                                        Federal Reserve chairman's semiannual testimony on economy

                                                                          The best way to highlight the significance of these events is look at a few notable
                                                                       macroeconomic examples from the past two decades.

                                                        2014 UkraineŁRussia Crisis

                                                        The 2014 UkraineŁRussia crisis was one of the biggest geopolitical events of the

162                                                     past decade. The crisis began in 2013 but didn't really hit its peak until March

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: MACRO EVENT DRIVEN TRADE  2014 when Russia signed a bill to absorb Crimea. Leading up to the announcement,

                                                        the uncertainty put significant pressure on the EURUSD in January 2014 with the

                                                        currency pair dropping sharply on March 18, 2014, the day that Russia declared that

                                                        Crimea was now officially apart of their country. This led to a few more weeks of

                                                        downward pressure for the EURUSD as shown in Figure 19.1 as investors awaited

                                                        the world's response. Many nations declared their support for Ukraine and war was

                                                        feared, but eventually Russia was only hit with sanctions, and a few months later,

                                                        the Ukraine crisis moved to the back burner.

                                                        European Sovereign Debt Crisis (2009Ł2013)

                                                        The European Sovereign Debt Crisis started in 2009 and lasted into 2013 with the bulk
                                                        of the damage being done by February 2012. It was a multiyear debt crisis that was
                                                        sparked by the inability of many member nations to meet their debt obligations after
                                                        the global financial crisis. Their banking sectors and economies suffered significant
                                                        losses, and persistently negative growth prospects made it impossible for countries
                                                        such as Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Cyprus to repay or refinance their government
                                                        debt. Between 2010 and 2012, all of these nations required bailouts or some form
                                                        of support from the Troika, composed of the ECB, IMF and European Commission.
                                                        While the problems were concentrated in smaller Eurozone nations, there was fear
163  FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: MACRO EVENT DRIVEN TRADE

     FIGURE 19.1 EURUSD Ukraine Crisis
         Source: eSignal
                                                        FIGURE 19.2 EURUSD Sovereign Debt Crisis
                                                        Source: eSignal

164                                                     of contagion for the major economies. The country of Spain did not require a bailout

                                                        but in 2012, a number of banks required additional funding. The crisis posed caused

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: MACRO EVENT DRIVEN TRADE  significant volatility for the euro. Figure 19.2 shows two long periods of EURUSD

                                                        weakness that were caused by bailouts, downgrades, and other negative headlines.

                                                        Global Financial Crisis (2007Ł2009), Subprime

                                                        One of the most important macroeconomic events of the twenty-first century was
                                                        the 2007 to 2009 subprime/global financial crisis. It was triggered by a sharp slide
                                                        in house prices, default on mortgages, and blowup of subprime mortgage backed
                                                        securities and collateralized debt obligations. This, in turn, caused massive losses for
                                                        banks and financial institutions, leading the failure of major firms such as Lehman
                                                        Brothers, Merrill Lynch, and Bear Stearns. The impact on the financial market and
                                                        the economy was staggering, with many countries falling into recession. During this
                                                        period, the stock market lost more than 50% of its value with the S&P 500, falling
                                                        from a high of 1,565 in October 2007 to a low of 676 in March 2009. As shown in
                                                        Figure 19.3, USDJPY dropped from a high of 116.47 in October 2007 to a low of
                                                        87.13 in January 2009. This was only the beginning of a multiyear decline for the
                                                        currency pair. EURUSD had a delayed reaction, rallying strongly between October
                                                        2007 and April 2008 as money flowed out of the U.S. economy, and then falling
                                                        sharply between July 2008 and October 2008 as the risk aversion and crisis spread
                                                        to Europe.
FIGURE 19.3 USDJPY Global Financial Crisis
Source: eSignal

Political Uncertainty: 2004 U.S. Presidential Election                                  165

Another example of major events impacting the currency market is the 2004 U.S.          FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: MACRO EVENT DRIVEN TRADE

presidential elections. In general, political instability causes perceived weakness

in currencies. The hotly contested presidential election in November of 2004,

combined with the differences in the candidates' stance on the growing budget

deficit, resulted in overall dollar bearishness. The sentiment was exacerbated even

further, given the lack of international support for the incumbent President (Bush)

due to the administration's decision to overthrow Saddam Hussein. As a result, in

the three weeks leading up to the election, the euro rose 600 pips against the U.S.

dollar. This can be seen in Figure 19.4. With a Bush victory becoming increasingly

clear and later confirmed, the dollar sold off against the majors as the market looked

ahead to what would probably end up being the maintenance of status quo. On the

day following the election, the EURUSD rose another 200 pips and then continued

to rise an additional 700 pips before peaking out six weeks later. This entire move

took place over the course of two months, which may seem like an eternity for

many, but this macroeconomic event really shaped the markets and for those who

were following it, big profits could have been made. However, this is important

even for short-term traders because given that the market was bearish dollars in

general leading up to the U.S. presidential election, a more prudent trade would be

to look for opportunities to buy the EURUSD on dips rather than trying sell rallies

and look for tops.
                                                                                     Post Election -
                                                                                     Another 700
                                                                                     Pip Rally

                                                        600 Pip Rally
                                                        Pre Election

                                                        2004 Election
                                                        Night

                                                        FIGURE 19.4 EURUSD Election Trade
                                                        Source: eSignal

166                                                     G7 Meeting Dubai September 2003

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: MACRO EVENT DRIVEN TRADE  The G7 finance ministers meeting on September 22, 2003, was a very important

                                                        turning point for the markets. The dollar collapsed significantly following the meeting

                                                        at which the G7 finance ministers wanted to see ``more flexibility in exchange rates.''

                                                        Despite the rather tame nature of these words, the market interpreted this line to be

                                                        a major shift in policy. The last time changes to this degree had been made was back in

                                                        2000. Taking a step back, the countries that constitute the G7 are the United States,

                                                        United Kingdom, Japan, Canada, Italy, Germany, and France. Collectively, these

                                                        countries account for two-thirds of the world's total economic output. Not all G7

                                                        meetings are important. The only time the market really hones in on the G7 finance

                                                        ministers meeting is when they expect big changes to be made to the statement. In

                                                        2000, the market paid particular attention to the upcoming meeting because there

                                                        was strong intervention in the EURUSD the day before the meeting. The meeting

                                                        in September 2003 was also important because the U.S. trade deficit was ballooning

                                                        and becoming a huge issue. The EURUSD bore the brunt of the dollar depreciation

                                                        while Japan and China were intervening aggressively in their currencies. As a result,

                                                        it was widely expected that the G7 finance ministers as a whole would issue a

                                                        statement that was highly critical of Japan and China's intervention policies. Leading

                                                        up to the meeting, the U.S. dollar had already begun to sell off as indicated by the

                                                        chart. At the time of the announcement, the EURUSD shot up 150 pips. Though

                                                        this initial move was not very substantial, between September 2003 and February
           6% Rally

14% Rally

                                               Sept 22, 2003                         FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: MACRO EVENT DRIVEN TRADE
                                               G7 Meeting

FIGURE 19.5 EURUSD G7 Meeting
Source: eSignal

2004 (which was the next G7 meeting), the dollar fell 8% on a trade-weighted 167
basis, 9% against the British pound, 11% against the euro, 7% against the yen,
and 1.5% against the Canadian dollar. To put the percentages into perspective, a
move of 11% is equivalent to approximately 1100 pips. Therefore, the longer-term
impact is much more significant than the immediate impact as the event itself has the
significance to change the overall sentiment in the market. Figure 19.5 is a weekly
chart of the EURUSD that illustrates how the currency pair performed following
the September 22, 2003 G7 meeting.

U.S. War Against Iraq

Geopolitical risks such as wars can also have a pronounced impact on the currency
market. Figure 19.6 shows that between December 2002 and February 2003, the
dollar depreciated 9% against the Swiss franc (USDCHF) in the months leading up
to war. The dollar sold off because the war itself was incredibly unpopular among
the international community. The Swiss franc was one of the primary beneficiaries
due to the country's political neutrality and safe-haven status. Between February
and March, traders began to believe that the inevitable war would turn into a quick
and decisive U.S. victory, so they began to unwind the war trade. This eventually
led to a 3% rally in USDCHF as investors exited their short dollar positions.

   Each of these events caused large-scale movements in the currency market. Such
events are clearly important to follow for all types of traders. Keeping abreast of
                                                        FIGURE 19.6 USDCHF Iraq War
                                                        Source: eSignal

168                                                     broad macroeconomic events can help traders make smarter decisions and prevent

                                                        them from fading large factors that may be brewing in the background. Most of

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY: MACRO EVENT DRIVEN TRADE  these events are talked about, debated, and anticipated many months in advance by

                                                        economists, currency analysts, and the international community in general.
                                                                CHAPTER 20

Quantitative Easing
and Its Impact on
Forex

                                                                                                  169

Quantitative easing is such an important topic that it deserves its own chapter.
      After the global financial crisis many countries fell into recession, and in
response central banks around the world lowered interest rates to record lows.
When rates could not fall any lower, they had to resort to unprecedented measures,
the most powerful of which was quantitative easing (QE). Between 2007 and 2015,
the Bank of Japan, Federal Reserve, Bank of England, European Central Bank, and
the Swedish National Bank all resorted to QE, and their decision had a significant
impact on their currencies on both a short- and long-term basis.

   The goal of quantitative easing is to keep yields low and to flood the market
with liquidity. To do so, a central bank would create money by buying financial
assets such as government bonds from banks using electronic cash. This basically
``creates new money.'' It also keeps yields low because bond prices have an inverse
relationship with yields and in giving banks money, the hope is that it will encourage
lending and in turn lead to more economic activity. The jury is out on how
much QE really helped these economies, but the influence on currencies was
undeniable.
QUANTITATIVE EASING AND ITS IMPACT ON FOREX U.S. Quantitative Easing

                          After the financial crisis, the first major central bank to respond with quantitative
                          easing was the U.S. Federal Reserve. In November 2008, the central bank launched
                          a $600 billion bond-buying program. The program was initially effective as the
                          economy improved, prompting the Fed to temporarily halt bond purchases.
                          However, the economy never gained additional momentum and as such, the central
                          bank returned with a second round of QE (dubbed QE2) in November 2010. The
                          size of the program matched the first round. Unfortunately, more bond buys were
                          needed, and QE3 was launched in September 2012. Unlike QE1 and QE2, QE3
                          was an open-ended program. The central bank announced plans to purchase $40
                          billion in assets every month, and in December 2012, that amount was increased
                          to $85 billion per month. The program lasted for five years, and purchases were
                          finally halted in October 2014. Figure 20.1 shows how each round of quantitative
                          easing impacted the EURUSD. As you can see, each round triggered a sharp rise in
                          EURUSD and--another way to look at it--weakness in the U.S. dollar. In 2008,
                          the month that QE1 was announced, EURUSD surged 17% from high to low.
                          When QE2 was announced, the EURUSD began a rally that took the pair up more
                          than 20%. QE3 led to a similar uptrend with gains extended when the program
                          was increased.
170

          UK Quantitative Easing

                          Quantitative easing was launched by the Bank of England in March 2009. At the
                          time, the BoE pledged to spend 75 billion pounds over a three-month period buying
                          UK assets, but the program continued and between March 2009 and January 2010,
                          the central bank had spent 200 billion pounds. In October 2011, growth started to
                          slow more dramatically with the economy facing a double dip recession. In response
                          policymakers voted to increase the QE program by another 75 billion. In February
                          2012, the central bank added another 50 billion and the same increase was made in
                          July 2012, bringing the total program to 375 billion pounds. Figure 20.2 shows how
                          GBPUSD responded to each round of QE. What is interesting is that the sterling
                          fell sharply in the run up to the March 2009 announcement. It extended lower
                          afterward but rebounded in the months that followed. In 2011, 2012, and 2013,
                          the sterling rallied the month that QE was announced. One important thing to
                          remember is that the Federal Reserve was also buying bonds and expanding its own
                          QE program at the time, so the two offset each other to some degree, limiting the
                          reaction in GBPUSD. More importantly, investors interpreted each round of BoE
                          QE as positive for the currency because they hoped that the central bank's efforts
                          would help to turn around the economy.
                              171

FIGURE 20.1 EURUSD US Fed QE  QUANTITATIVE EASING AND ITS IMPACT ON FOREX
Source: eSignal
QUANTITATIVE EASING AND ITS IMPACT ON FOREX172

                       FIGURE 20.2 GBPUSD UK BoE QE
                          Source: eSignal
                                 173

FIGURE 20.3 USDJPY Japan BoJ QE  QUANTITATIVE EASING AND ITS IMPACT ON FOREX
Source: eSignal
QUANTITATIVE EASING AND ITS IMPACT ON FOREX174

                       FIGURE 20.4 EURUSD EZ ECB QE
                          Source: eSignal
 Japan Quantitative Easing                                                                             QUANTITATIVE EASING AND ITS IMPACT ON FOREX

               The phrase quantitative easing was first used by the Bank of Japan in 2001. At the time,
               they did not believe that the program was effective but after the financial crisis, they
               said they would examine their asset purchase program. In October 2011 the Bank of
               Japan increased the program by 5 trillion yen which was a small sum (approximately
               USD$66 billion) compared to the staggering amounts that other countries were
               purchasing. Then in April 2013, they announced a bold and aggressive plan to
               buy 60 trillion to 70 trillion yen a year as part of Prime Minister Abe's economic
               policies. This program was later expanded to 80 billion yen a year. Unlike other
               countries where the effectiveness of QE was debated, Japan's bond buying program
               played a large role in turning around the economy. It also had a significant impact
               on the currency. In Figure 20.3 we show how the first program yielded a very small
               response in USDJPY but when the Bank of Japan came out in size, USDJPY reacted
               quickly and aggressively with a move that extended even further when the program
               was expanded.

 Eurozone Quantitative Easing

               The European Central Bank was the last major central bank to roll out quantitative 175
               easing. They were reluctant to do so for a very long time because structurally the
               Eurozone is not set up for quantitative easing. Since there is no euro-bond, some
               critics felt that it was not in line with the central bank's mandate. However faced
               with sluggish growth, stubbornly low inflation, and an interest rate already at zero,
               the ECB had very few options. They publicly discussed the option months before the
               actual decision, giving the market plenty of opportunity to discount the move. In
               January 2015, the ECB announced that they would spend 60 billion euros per month
               buying private and public bonds. In March 2015, ECB President Draghi unveiled
               an aggressive 1 trillion quantitative easing program. As shown in Figure 20.4, both
               announcements had a significant impact on the currency, but EURUSD stabilized
               after the second announcement (but only after falling 500 pips) because investors
               hoped that the aggressive program by the central bank would help turn around
               the economy.

                  While no additional quantitative easing programs are expected as of mid-2015,
               the unwinding of these unprecedented measures in the coming years should have
               just as much impact on currencies as the initial announcement itself, providing an
               opportunity for forex traders.
