                                                                CHAPTER 26

Currency Profiles
and Outlook

In order to understand how to trade currencies effectively, it is important to have                  203
  a firm grasp of the general economic characteristics of the most commonly traded
currencies. This includes understanding which economic reports and factors have the

most significant impact on a currency's movements. For example, some currencies

are extremely sensitive to commodity price movements and others are not. Learn-

ing the characteristics or personalities of each currency will help traders understand

what factors influence the exchange rate on a short- and long-term basis. We will

look at the eight most actively traded currencies--the U.S. dollar, euro, British

pound, Swiss franc, Japanese yen, and Australian, New Zealand, and Canadian

dollars. Of course, the most important currency of them all is the U.S. dollar.

 Currency Profile: U.S. Dollar (USD)

             Broad Economic Overview

               The United States is the world's leading economic power, with gross domestic
               product valued at over US$17 trillion as of 2014. This is the highest in the world,
               and based on the purchasing power parity model, it is four times the size of Japan's
               output, five times the size of Germany's, and seven times the size of the United
               Kingdom's. The United States is primarily a service-oriented country, with nearly
                               80% of its GDP coming from real estate, transportation, finance, health care, and

                               business services. Yet, the sheer size of the U.S. manufacturing sector still makes

                               the U.S. dollar particularly sensitive to developments in the manufacturing sector.

                               With the United States having the largest and most liquid equity and fixed income

                               markets in the world, foreign investors have consistently increased their purchases

                               of U.S. assets. According to the IMF, foreign direct investments into the U.S. are

                               equal to approximately 40% of total global net inflows for the United States. On a

                               net basis, the United States absorbs 71% of total foreign savings. This means that if

                               foreign investors are not satisfied with their returns in the U.S. asset markets and

                               they decide to repatriate their funds, this would have a significant effect on U.S.

                               asset values and the U.S. dollar. More specifically, if foreign investors sell their

                               U.S. dollar denominated assets holdings in search of higher yielding assets elsewhere,

                               this would typically result in a decline in the value of the U.S. asset, as well as the

                               U.S. dollar.

                               The import and export volume of the United States also exceeds that of any other

                               country. This is due to the country's sheer size, as true import and export volume

                               represent a mere 12% of GDP. Despite this large activity, on a netted basis, the

                               United States is running a very large current account deficit of over $113 billion as

                               of Q4 2014. This is a major problem that the U.S. economy has been struggling

                               with for decades, as the large current account deficit makes the U.S. dollar highly

204                            sensitive to changes in capital flows. In fact, in order to prevent a decline in the U.S.

                               dollar as a result of trade, the United States needs to attract a significant amount

CURRENCY PROFILES AND OUTLOOK  of capital inflows per day. Thankfully, the U.S. bond market is the largest in the

                               world, and Treasuries remain an attractive investment due to the lack of suitable

                               alternatives.

                               Most major economies also count the United States as its largest trading partner,

                               with U.S. trade representing 20% of total world trade. These rankings are very

                               important because changes in the value of the dollar and its volatility will impact the

                               U.S. trading activities with these respective countries. More specifically, a weaker

                               dollar will encourage more U.S. exports, whereas a stronger dollar could curb

                               foreign demand for American goods. However, since the United States is not a

                               trade-dependent economy, the strength of a dollar is less troublesome. Here's a

                               breakdown of the most important trading partners for the United States, in order of

                               importance:

                               Leading Export Markets
                               1. Canada
                               2. Mexico
                               3. China
                               4. European Union
                               5. Japan
Leading Import Sources                                                               CURRENCY PROFILES AND OUTLOOK

1. China
2. Canada
3. Mexico
4. European Union
5. Japan

Source: US Trade.gov 2014

Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers--The Federal Reserve

The Federal Reserve Board (Fed) is the monetary policy authority of the United
States. The Fed is responsible for setting and implementing monetary policy. The
board consists of a 12-member Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The
voting members of the FOMC are the seven governors of the Federal Reserve Board,
plus five presidents of the 12 district reserve banks. The FOMC holds eight meetings
per year, which are widely watched for interest rate announcements or changes in
growth expectations. After four of those meetings, the head of the Central Bank
holds a press conference, and typically that is when major monetary policy changes
are made.

   The Fed has a high degree of independence to set monetary authority. They are 205
less subject to political influences, as most members are accorded long terms that
allow them to remain in office through periods of alternate party dominance in both
the presidency and Congress.

   The Federal Reserve issues a biannual Monetary Policy Report in February and
July followed by the HumphreyŁHawkins testimony where the Federal Reserve
chairman responds to questions from both the Congress and the Banking Committees
in regards to this report. This report is important to watch, as it contains the FOMC
forecasts for GDP growth, inflation, and unemployment.

   The Fed, unlike most other central banks, has a mandate or ``long-run objectives''
of ``price stability and sustainable economic growth.'' In order to adhere to these
goals, the Fed has to use monetary policy to limit inflation and unemployment
and achieve balanced growth. The most popular tools that the Fed uses to control
monetary policy include the following.

Open Market Operations

Open market operations involve Fed purchases of government securities, including
Treasury bills, notes and bonds. This is one of the most popular methods for
the Fed to signal and implement policy changes. Generally speaking, increases in
Fed purchases of government securities decreases interest rates, while selling of
government securities by the Fed boosts interest rates.
                               Fed Funds Target

                               The Fed Funds target rate is the key policy target of the Federal Reserve. It is

                               the interest rate for borrowing that the Fed offers to its member banks. The Fed

                               tends to increase this rate to curb inflation or decrease this rate to promote growth

                               and consumption. Changes to this rate are closely watched by the market and tend

                               to imply major changes in policy and will typically have large ramifications for

                               global fixed income and equity markets. The market also pays particular attention

                               to the statement released by the Federal Reserve as it can offer guidance for future

                               monetary policy actions.

                               Fiscal policy is in the hands of the U.S. Treasury. Fiscal policy decisions include

                               determining the appropriate level of taxes and government spending. In fact,

                               although the markets pay more attention to the Federal Reserve, the U.S. Treasury

                               is the actual government body that determines dollar policy. That is, if they feel

                               that the USD rate on the foreign exchange market is under- or overvalued, the

                               U.S. Treasury is the government body that gives the NY Federal Reserve Board the

                               authority and instructions to intervene in the foreign exchange market by physically

                               selling or buying USD. Therefore, the Treasury's view on dollar policy and changes

                               to that view can be important to the currency market.

                               Over the past few decades, the Treasury and Fed officials have maintained a

                               ``strong dollar'' bias. While a weak dollar helps to promote growth for political

206                            reasons, the government is unlikely to change their stance in support of a weak

CURRENCY PROFILES AND OUTLOOK  dollar policy.

                               Important Characteristics of the U.S. Dollar

                                Over 80% of all currency deals involve the dollar. The most liquid currencies in the
                                 foreign exchange market are the EURUSD, USDJPY, GBPUSD, and USDCHF.
                                 These currencies represent the most commonly traded currencies in the world,
                                 and it is no coincidence that all of these currency pairs involve the U.S. dollar. In
                                 fact, 80% of all currency deals, which include currency conversion, hedging, and
                                 trade settlement, involve the U.S. dollar. This explains why U.S. data, the U.S.
                                 dollar, and U.S. fundamentals are so important to foreign exchange traders.

                                Prior to the introduction of the euro and the growing utilization of the Chinese renminbi,
                                 the U.S. dollar was considered one the world's premier ``safe-haven'' reserve currencies. The
                                 U.S. dollar has long been one of the world's premier ``safe-haven'' currencies, with
                                 76% of global currency reserves held in dollars. To this day, the dollar is still the
                                 preferred currency of choice, but in recent years its safe haven, reserve currency
                                 status has been challenged by the euro and Chinese renminbi. We are still a very
                                 long way from the dollar being usurped by either currency, but in the past decade,
                                 many central banks have slowly diversified their reserves by reducing their dollar
                                 holdings and increasing their euro and renminbi holdings. This trend will only
accelerate in the years to come, but until European and Chinese bond markets are
large and developed enough to handle the reserve diversification flows, the dollar
and U.S. Treasuries will still be the investment of choice for reserve managers.

 The U.S. dollar moves in the opposite direction of gold prices. One of the unique
  characteristics of the U.S. dollar is that there is a strong inverse relationship
  between the price of gold and the value of the U.S. dollar as shown in Figure 26.1.
  These two instruments are near-perfect mirror images of each other, which means
  that when the value of the dollar declines, the price of gold rises; and when the
  dollar appreciates, the price of gold falls. There is, of course, a good reason--gold
  is priced in U.S. dollars. The correlation is not perfect--in times of geopolitical
  uncertainty, investors generally prefer hard versus fiat currencies or gold versus
  the dollar.

 Many emerging market countries ``peg'' their local currencies to the dollar. Pegging a

currency to the dollar refers to the idea that a government agrees to maintain their

currency at a specific rate or range to the U.S. dollar. As the value of the dollar

changes, this requires the central bank to buy or sell their local currency and

the U.S. dollar to maintain the peg. For example, let's imagine that Country A

pledges to maintain a fixed currency peg of 7.5 versus the U.S. dollar. If the dollar

weakens, causing downward pressure on the exchange rate, the central bank                207
would have to buy U.S. dollars and sell their local currency to maintain the peg.

After buying dollars, they would typically invest those funds into U.S. Treasuries.      CURRENCY PROFILES AND OUTLOOK

                                   Dollar Index vs. Gold

2000                                                                          105
                                                                              100
1900                                                                          95
                                                                              90
1800                                                                          85
                                                                              80
1700                                                                          75
                                                                              70
1600                                                               2/19/15

1500

1400

1300

1200

1100

1000         2/19/11  2/19/12            2/19/13          2/19/14
    2/19/10

                                   Gold  Dollar

FIGURE 26.1 Dollar Index vs. Gold
                               This process is exactly how China and other Asian economies became large
                               holders of US Treasuries. Through the years, many countries have switched from
                               a fixed to floating rate peg and in some cases a peg that references a basket of
                               currencies, but in each case, the dollar is still the leading component. However,
                               the movement from fixed U.S. dollar pegs to a basket reduces the amount of
                               dollars that a country like China needs to buy, and as their currency regime and
                               others in the region are loosened further, the impact on the dollar will grow.

                                Interest rate differentials between U.S. Treasuries and foreign bonds strongly followed. The
                                 interest rate differentials between U.S. Treasuries and foreign bonds are a very
                                 important relationship that professional FX traders need to follow. It can be a
                                 strong indicator of potential currency movements because the U.S. market is one
                                 of the largest markets in the world, and investors are very sensitive to the yields
                                 that the offered by U.S. assets. Large investors are constantly looking for assets
                                 with the highest yields. As yields in the U.S. decrease or if yields abroad increase,
                                 this would induce investors to sell their U.S. assets and purchase foreign assets.
                                 Selling U.S. fixed income or equity assets would influence the currency market
                                 because that would require selling U.S. dollars and buying the foreign currency.
                                 If U.S. yields rise or foreign yields decrease, investors in general would be more
                                 inclined to purchase U.S. assets, therefore boosting the value of the dollar (USD).

208                             Keep an eye on the dollar index. Market participants closely follow the U.S. dollar

                               index as a gauge of overall dollar strength or weakness. The USD index is a

CURRENCY PROFILES AND OUTLOOK  futures contract traded on the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) that is calculated

                               using the trade-weighted geometric average of six currencies. It is important to

                               follow this index because when market participants are reporting general dollar

                               weakness or a decline in the trade-weighted dollar, they are typically referring to

                               this index. Unfortunately, the weighting does not accurately reflect U.S. trade

                               activity. Nonetheless, the DXY is closely followed and actively traded. Also,

                               even though the dollar may have moved significantly against a single currency, it

                               may have not moved as significantly on a trade-weighted basis. This is important

                               because some central bankers may choose to focus on the trade-weighted index

                               instead of the individual currency pair's performance against the dollar.

                                The dollar is impacted by equities and Treasuries. In earlier chapters, we have
                                 established that there is a strong correlation between a country's equity and
                                 fixed-income markets and its currency: If the equity market is rising, generally
                                 speaking, foreign investment dollars should be coming in to seize the opportunity.
                                 If equity markets are falling, domestic investors will be selling their shares of local
                                 companies and looking for opportunities abroad. With fixed-income markets,
                                 economies boasting the most valuable fixed income opportunities with the highest
                                 yields will be capable of attracting more foreign investment. Daily fluctuations
                                 and developments in any of these markets reflect movement of foreign portfolio
  investments, which would require foreign exchange transactions. Cross border        CURRENCY PROFILES AND OUTLOOK
  merger and acquisition activities can also influence the price action of currencies.
  Large M&A deals, particularly those that involve a significant cash portion, will
  have a notable impact on the currency markets. The reason is that the acquirer
  will need to buy or sell dollars to fund their cross-border acquisition.

Important Economic Indicators for the United States

Economic data is always important, but U.S. data tends to have the greatest impact
on currencies because more than 80% of currency transactions involve the U.S.
dollar. Here are some of the most important and market moving pieces of U.S. data:

Employment: Nonfarm Payrolls

The employment report is the most important and widely watched indicator on the
economic calendar. Its importance is mostly due to political influences rather than
pure economic reasons, as the Fed is under strict pressure to keep unemployment
under control. As a result, interest rate policy is directly influenced by employment
conditions. The monthly jobs report consists of data compiled from two different
surveys: the establishment survey and the household survey. The establishment
survey provides data on nonfarm payroll employment, average hourly workweek,
and the aggregate hours index. The household survey provides information on the
labor force, household employment, and the unemployment rate. When this report 209
is released on the first Friday of every month, forex traders will immediately hone
in on the nonfarm payrolls number, the unemployment rate, and average hourly
earnings. However, any revisions or seasonal adjustments can also impact the dollar's
reaction to the overall report.

Consumer Price Index

The Consumer Price Index is a key gauge of inflation. The index measures the prices
on a fixed basket of consumer goods. Economists tend to focus more on the CPI-U
or the core inflation rate, which excludes the volatile food and energy components.
The indicator is widely watched by the FX markets as it drives a lot of activity
because job growth and inflation is the key to monetary policy.

Retail Sales

The key to growth is consumer spending and for this reason, the retail sales report
is also extremely market moving. The Retail Sales Index measures the total goods
sold by a sampling of retail stores over the course of a month. This index is used as
a gauge of consumer consumption and consumer confidence. The most important
number to watch is retail sales less autos, as auto sales can vary month-to-month.
While retail sales can be quite volatile due to seasonality, it is one of the most
important indicators on the health of the economy along with a key input for GDP.
                               Nonmanufacturing and Manufacturing ISM

                               The monthly nonmanufacturing and manufacturing reports released by the Institute
                               for Supply Management is also important because it generally provides the most
                               current information on activity in the economy. ISM releases a monthly composite
                               index based on surveys of 300 purchasing managers nationwide representing 20
                               different industries. An index value above 50 reflects expansion, while values below
                               50 are indicative of contraction. The ISM nonmanufacturing index is particularly
                               important because the United States is a services economy, and typically this report
                               is released ahead of nonfarm payrolls; and the employment subcomponent can
                               provide early clues on the health of the labor market.

                               Consumer Confidence

                               The Consumer Confidence Survey measures how individuals feel about the economy.
                               There are two popular reports--one released by the Conference Board and one
                               by the University of Michigan. In the Conference Board survey, questionnaires
                               are sent out to a nationwide representative sample of 5,000 households, of which
                               approximately 3,500 respond. Households are asked five questions:

                               1. A rating of business conditions in the household's area

                               2. A rating of business conditions in six months

210                            3. Job availability in the area

                               4. Job availability in six months

CURRENCY PROFILES AND OUTLOOK  5. Family income in six months

                                  Responses are seasonally adjusted and an index is constructed for each response,
                               and then a composite index is fashioned based on the aggregate responses. The
                               University of Michigan Survey, on the other hand, only polls 500 people, but since
                               it is released before the Conference Board's report, it can have a larger impact
                               on currencies. Rising consumer confidence is viewed as a precursor to stronger
                               consumer spending and growth.

                               Producer Price Index

                               The Producer Price Index (PPI) is a family of indexes that measures average changes in
                               selling prices received by domestic producers for their output. PPI tracks changes
                               in prices for nearly every goods producing industry in the domestic economy, includ-
                               ing agriculture, electricity and natural gas, forestry, fisheries, manufacturing, and
                               mining. Foreign exchange markets tend to focus on seasonally adjusted finished goods
                               PPI and how the index has reacted on a monthly, quarterly, and annualized basis.

                               Gross Domestic Product

                               Gross domestic product, or GDP, is a measure of the total production and
                               consumption of goods and services. In the United States, the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) constructs two complementary measures of GDP, one based on            CURRENCY PROFILES AND OUTLOOK
income and one based on expenditures. The advance release of GDP, which occurs
the month after each quarter ends, contains some BEA estimates for data not yet
released, inventories and trade balance, and is the most important release. Other
releases of GDP, which are the revisions, are typically not very significant unless a
major change is made.

International Trade

The balance of trade represents the difference between exports and imports of
foreign trade in goods and services. Merchandise data are provided for U.S. total
foreign trade with all countries and details for trade with specific countries and
regions of the world, as well as for individual commodities. Traders tend to focus
on seasonally adjusted trade numbers over a three-month period as single month
trade periods are regarded as volatile and less reliable.

Employment Cost Index (ECI)

The employment cost index data is based on a survey of employer payrolls in the
third month of the quarter for the pay period ending on the twelfth day of the
month. This survey is a probability sample of approximately 3,600 private industry
employers and 700 state and local governments, public schools, and public hospitals.
The big advantage of ECI is that it includes nonwage costs, which adds as much 211
as 30% to total labor costs. Reaction to the ECI, however, is often muted as it
is generally very stable. It should be noted however that it is one of the Federal
Reserve's favorite indicators.

Industrial Production

The Index of Industrial Production is a set of indexes that measures the monthly
physical output of U.S. factories, mines, and utilities. The index is broken down
by industry type and market type. Foreign exchange markets focus mostly on the
seasonally adjusted monthly change in aggregate figure. Increases in the index are
typically dollar positive.

Treasury International Capital Flow Data (TIC Data)

The Treasury International Capital flow data measures the amount of capital flow
into the United States on a monthly basis. This economic release has become
increasingly important over the past few years since the funding of the U.S. deficit
is becoming more of an issue. Aside from the headline number itself, the market
also pays close attention to the official flows, which represents the demand for U.S.
government debt by foreign central banks.
                                                                               CHAPTER 27

   Currency Profile:
   Euro (EUR)

 Broad Economic Overview

                                                                                                                213
               The European Union (EU) was developed as an institutional framework for the
               construction of a united Europe. As of May 2015, the EU consists of 28 member
               countries with 19 of these nations sharing the euro as a common currency. The
               Eurozone consists of Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
               Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands,
               Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Spain. With the exception of Denmark and the
               United Kingdom, other EU states are obliged to join the monetary union when they
               meet the criteria to do so. Aside from a common currency, these countries also
               share a single monetary policy dictated by the European Central Bank (ECB). These
               common currency countries constitute the European Monetary Union (EMU).

                  The EMU is the world's second largest economic power, with gross domestic
               product valued at approximately US$18 trillion in 2014. With a highly developed
               fixed income, equity, and futures market, the EMU is the second most attractive
               investment market for domestic and international investors. In its early days, the
               EMU found difficulty attracting foreign direct investment or large capital flows
               because, historically, the U.S. markets are larger with more consistent returns. As
               a result, the U.S. absorbs 71% of total foreign savings. However, with the euro
               becoming an established currency and the European Monetary Union incorporating
               more members, the euro's importance as a reserve currency is rising and translating
               into greater capital flows. The only problem is that European bond markets are
                              fragmented, and there are not enough quality assets for central banks to invest in.
                              Unless there are euro bonds, foreign central banks could be slow to diversify their
                              reserve holdings. Nonetheless, they will do so gradually, providing ongoing support
                              for the euro.

                                 Trade is extremely important to Eurozone nations and most countries conduct
                              the majority of their trade with other states in the region. This is important because
                              one of the most valuable aspects of the euro is its facilitation of trade activity through
                              the elimination of exchange rate risk. Large Eurozone nations such as Germany,
                              France, Italy, and Spain also conduct significant trade activity with countries like the
                              United States and China. This makes the value of the euro particularly important
                              to economic activity. A country like the United States is less sensitive to exchange
                              rate fluctuations because most of its demand is internal, but Europe is extremely
                              sensitive to its exchange rate because many Eurozone nations rely on external
                              demand. The size and scope of the EMU's trade with the rest of the world provides
                              it with significant power in the international trade arena. International clout is also
                              one of the primary goals in the formation of the European Union, because it allows
                              individual nations to negotiate as a group on an equal playing field with the United
                              States and China, their two largest trading partners. The breakdowns of the most
                              important trading partners for the European Union are the following:

214                           Leading Export Markets

                              1. United States

CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)  2. China

                              3. Switzerland

                              4. Russia

                              5. Turkey

                              Leading Import Sources

                              1. China
                              2. Russia
                              3. United States
                              4. Norway
                              5. Switzerland

                                 While trade is extremely important, the service sector has the largest share of
                              total output followed by manufacturing. In fact, a large number of the companies
                              whose primary purpose is to produce finished products still concentrate their EU
                              activity on innovation, research, design, and marketing, while outsourcing most of
                              their manufacturing activities to Asia.

                                 The EU's growing role in international trade has major implications for the role of
                              the euro as a reserve currency. As more countries conduct trade with the Eurozone,
               they will be motivated to accumulate more euros to reduce exchange risk and           CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)
               transaction costs. Traditionally, most international trade transactions involve the
               British pound, the Japanese yen, and/or the U.S. dollar. Before the establishment of
               the euro, it was unreasonable to hold large amounts of every individual EU national
               currency. As a result, currency reserves tended toward the dollar. At the end of the
               1990s, approximately 65% of all world reserves were held in U.S. dollars, but after
               the introduction of the euro, foreign reserve assets slowly shifted towards the euro.
               This trend will only continue as the world becomes more globalized.

 Monetary and Fiscal Policy
   Makers--The European Central Bank

               The European Central Bank (ECB) is the governing body responsible for determining
               the monetary policy of the countries participating in the EMU. The Executive Board
               of the EMU consists of the president of the ECB, the vice president of the ECB, and
               four other members. These individuals, along with the governors of the national
               central banks, comprise the Governing Council. The ECB is set up such that the
               Executive Board implements the policies dictated by the Governing Council. New
               monetary policies decisions are typically made by majority vote, with the president
               having the casting vote in the event of a tie in their monthly meeting. After each
               meeting the Central Bank president holds a press conference to answer questions. 215
               This is also used as an opportunity to clarify their monetary policy stance.

                  The EMU's primary objective is to maintain price stability and promote growth.
               Monetary and fiscal policy changes are made to ensure that this objective is met. With
               the formation of the EMU, the Maastricht Treaty was developed by the Union to
               apply a number of criteria for each member country. These criteria were developed
               by the Union to help them achieve their objective. Deviations from these criteria
               by any one country will result in heavy fines. Listed below are the EMU criteria.
               It is apparent based on these criteria that the ECB has a strict mandate focused on
               inflation and deficit. Generally, the ECB strives to maintain annual growth in HCPI
               (Harmonized Consumer Price Index) below 2% and M3 (Money Supply) annual
               growth around 4.5%.

             The EMU Criteria

               In the 1992 Treaty on European Union (the Maastricht Treaty) the following
               preconditions were created for any EU member state looking to join the economic
               and monetary union (EMU).

                A rate of inflation no more than 1.5% above the average of the three best
                 performing member states, taking the average of the 12-month year-on-year rate
                 preceding the assessment date.
                               Long-term interest rates not exceeding the average rates of these low-inflation
                                states by more than 2% for the preceding 12 months.

                               Exchange rates which fluctuate within the normal margins of the exchange-rate
                                mechanism (ERM) for at least two years.

                               A general government debt/GDP ratio of not more than 60%, although a higher
                                ratio may be permissible if it is ``sufficiently diminishing.''

                               A general government deficit not exceeding 3% of GDP, although a small and
                                temporary excess can be permitted.

                              If a country meets the convergence criteria and joins the EMU, their monetary

                              policy will be determined by the European Central Bank (ECB). The ECB and the

                              ESCB (European System of Central Banks) are independent institutions from both

                              national governments and other EU institutions, granting them complete control

                              over monetary policy. This operational independence is accorded to them as per

                              Article 108 of the Maastricht Treaty, which states that any member of the decision-

                              making bodies cannot seek or take instructions from any Community Institutions,

                              any government of a member state, or any other body. In other words, no one

                              country can pressure the ECB into making a monetary policy change that is in only

                              their best interest. The primary tools the ECB uses to control monetary policy is the

216                           following.

CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)  Open Market Operations

                              The ECB has four main categories of open market operations to steer interest rates,
                              manage liquidity, and signal monetary policy stance. This includes:

                               Main refinancing operations. These are regular liquidity-providing reverse transac-
                                tions conducted weekly with a maturity of two weeks, which provide the bulk of
                                refinancing to the financial sector.

                               Longer-term refinancing operations. These are liquidity-providing reverse transactions
                                with a monthly frequency and a maturity of three months, which provide
                                counterparties with additional longer-term refinancing.

                               Fine-tuning operations. These are executed on an ad-hoc basis, with the aim of
                                both managing the liquidity situation in the market and steering interest rates, in
                                particular in order to smooth the effects on interest rates caused by unexpected
                                liquidity fluctuations.

                               Structural operations. These involve the issuance of debt certificates, reverse trans-
                                actions, and outright transactions. These operations will be executed whenever
                                the ECB wishes to adjust the structural position of the Eurosystem vis-a`-vis the
                                financial sector (on a regular or nonregular basis).
ECB Minimum Bid Rate (Repo Rate)                                                         CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)

The ECB minimum bid rate is the key policy target for the ECB and the level of
borrowing that the ECB offers to the central banks of its member states. This is also
the rate that is subject to change at the monthly ECB meetings. Since inflation is a
major concern for European policy makers, they are generally more inclined to keep
interest rates at lofty levels to prevent inflation. Changes in the ECB's minimum bid
rate can have large ramifications for the EUR.

   The ECB does not have an exchange rate target, but will factor in exchange rates
in their policy deliberations because they can affect price stability. A high exchange
rate lowers inflationary pressures while a low exchange rate promotes it. The ECB is
not prohibited from intervening in the foreign exchange markets if they believe that
inflation is a concern. As a result, comments by members of the Governing Council
are closely watched by forex traders and can have a significant impact on the euro.

   In addition to their monthly meetings, the Central Bank will also publish a
monthly bulletin and release staff forecasts and minutes from past meetings. The
president of the Central Bank holds a press conference after the policy meeting and
that, along with each of these event risks, can cause volatility in the currency.

   Now let's take a look at some of the important characteristics of the euro:

 EURUSD cross is the most liquid and actively traded currency. The euro was introduced
  as an electronic currency in January 1999. At the time, the euro replaced all 217
  pre-EMU currencies, except for Greece's currency, which was converted to the
  euro in January 2001. As a result, the EURUSD cross is now the most liquid
  currency in the world and its movements are used as the primary gauge of the
  health of both the European and U.S. economies. Figure 27.1 highlights the
  10 year performance of EUR-USD. The euro is most frequently known as the
  ``anti-dollar'' since dollar or U.S. fundamentals generally have a greater impact
  on the movement of the currency.
     EURJPY and EURCHF are also very liquid currencies that can be used as a
  gauge of the health of the Japanese and Swiss economies. Many new traders will
  start with the EURUSD because of its orderly movements, tight spread, and
  liquidity.

 Euro: A currency without a country. One of the greatest problems of the euro is that it
  is currency without a country. Instead, it bears the economic, political, and social
  risks of 19 different nations. This is its greatest strength and its greatest weakness.
  In the past decade, we have seen how the debt crisis in smaller Eurozone nations
  have affected the currency as a whole. It undermines confidence and has, on many
  occasions, put the entire monetary union at risk.

 Spread between 10-year U.S. Treasuries and 10-year Bunds can indicate euro sentiment.
  Ten-year government bonds can serve as an important indicator of where the euro
CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)218

                       FIGURE 27.1 EURUSD 10-Year Chart
                          Source: eSignal
                 is headed, especially against the U.S. dollar. The differential between the 10-year   CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)
                 U.S. government bond and the 10-year German Bund rates can provide a good
                 indication for EURUSD's movement. If Bund rates are higher than U.S. Treasury
                 rates and the differential increases, or the spread widens, this is generally positive
                 for the EURUSD. Alternatively, a decrease in the differential or a tightening of
                 the interest rates is generally bearish for EURUSD. As there is no Euro bond,
                 the 10-year German Bund yield is typically used as the benchmark bond for the
                 Eurozone because Germany is the largest country in the monetary union.

                Predictions for euro area money flows. Another useful rate to follow is the three-month
                 interest rate, also known as the euro interbank offer rate or the Euribor rate. This
                 is the rate offered from one large bank to another on interbank term deposits.
                 Traders tend to compare the Euribor futures rate with the Eurodollar futures rate.
                 Eurodollars are deposits denominated in U.S. dollars at banks and other financial
                 institutions outside the United States. Because investors like high-yielding assets,
                 European fixed-income assets become more attractive as the spread between
                 Euribor futures and Eurodollar futures widens in favor of Euribors. As the spread
                 narrows, European assets become less attractive, whereby implying a potential
                 decrease in money flows into the Euro.

                  Mergers and acquisition activity can also affect how the EURUSD moves.
               In recent years we have seen increased M&A activity between EU and U.S. 219
               multinationals. Large deals, especially with a large cash component, can lead to a
               sudden burst in the EURUSD, but the reaction is generally short-lived.

 Important Indicators for the Euro

               When it comes to Eurozone economic reports, the only ones that affect the euro are
               German or Eurozone data. The largest countries in the Eurozone in order of GDP
               contribution are Germany, France, Italy, and Spain. While French and Italian data
               are important, they rarely move the currency. So what forex traders should focus on
               are the broader regional reports and German data. Central bank rate decisions are
               the most important, but here are some additional economic reports that can have
               meaningful impact on the currency.

             PMIs

               Every month, Markit Economics releases the PMI indices for the Manufacturing
               and Service sectors. For the Eurozone, they provide this data for the four largest
               economies and a composite index for the region. These numbers are extremely
               market moving because they provide the most up-to-date information on how each
               of the economies are performing in the current month and not how the economies
CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)performed the previous month like many other reports. However, since the reports
                          are for the current period, they are usually subject to revisions so the euro will
                          move on the preliminary and secondary reports. A reading above 50 represents
                          expansion, and a reading below 50 represents contraction. For the Eurozone, the
                          manufacturing PMI index is the most important along with the composite index,
                          which aggregates how the manufacturing and service sector are performing. Since
                          the German data are released shortly before the Eurozone report, they can have a
                          greater impact on the currency.

                        IFO Survey

                          Germany is by far the largest economy in Europe and is responsible for approximately
                          20% of total GDP. Any insight into German business conditions is seen as an insight
                          into Europe as a whole. The IFO is a monthly survey conducted by the IFO institute.
                          They survey over 7,000 German businesses, asking for their assessment of the
                          German business climate and their short-term plans. The initial publication of the
                          results consists of the business climate headline figure and its two equally weighted
                          subindices: current business conditions and business expectations. The typical range
                          is from 80 to 120, with a higher number indicating greater business confidence. The
                          report is most valuable, however, when measured against previous data.

220
                        Inflation Indicators--HICP

                          Since the ECB has an inflation mandate, the EU Harmonized Index of Consumer
                          Prices (HICP) published by Eurostat is very important. This harmonized index is
                          designed for international comparison as required by EU law. The index is compiled
                          with information on prices retrieved by each national statistical agency. Individual
                          countries are required to provide Eurostat with the 100 indices used to compute the
                          HICP. The national HICPs are totaled by Eurostat as a weighted average of these
                          subindices, and the weights used are country-specific. The HICP is released at the
                          end of the month following the reference period, which is about 10 days after the
                          publications of the national CPIs from Spain and France, the final EMU-5 countries
                          to release their CPIs. Even if part of the information is already known when the
                          HICP is released, it is an important release because it serves as the reference inflation
                          index for the ECB who aims to keep Eurozone consumer price inflation between
                          0% and 2%.

                        German Industrial Production

                          Industrial production data are seasonally adjusted (SA) and include a breakdown into
                          four major subcategories: mining, manufacturing, energy, and construction. The
                          manufacturing aggregate comprises four main product groups: basic and producer
goods, capital goods, consumer durables, and consumer nondurables. The market        CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)
tends to pay attention to the annual rate of change and the seasonally adjusted
month-on-month figure. Germany's figure is most important since it is the largest
country in the Eurozone; however, the market can also react to the French industrial
production report. The initial industrial production release is based on a narrower
data sample and hence subject to revision when the full sample has become available.
The ministry occasionally provides insight on the expected direction of the revision
in the initial data release.

German Unemployment

Labor market numbers are important for every country and in the case of the
Eurozone, German unemployment is the most important. Released by the Labor
Office, the data contain information on the number of unemployed, as well as
the changes on the previous month, on both seasonally (SA) and nonseasonally
(NSA) adjusted terms. The NSA unemployment rate is provided, along with data
on vacancies, short-shift working arrangements, and the number of employees
(temporarily suspended in 1999). Within an hour after the FLO release, the
Bundesbank releases the SA unemployment rate. The day ahead of the release,
there is often a leak of the official data from a trade-union source. The leak is
usually of the NSA level of unemployment in millions. When a precise figure is 221
reported on Reuters, as given by ``sources'' for the NSA level of unemployment,
the leak usually reflects the official figures. Rumors often circulate up to one week
before the official release, and they are notoriously imprecise. Regardless, a drop
in unemployment along with an improvement in the jobless rate is positive for the
currency, whereas a rise in jobless claims or increase in the unemployment rate is
negative for the currency.

Preliminary GDP

Preliminary GDP is issued when Eurostat has collected data from a sufficient number
of countries to produce an estimate. This usually includes France, Germany, and
the Netherlands. However, Italy is not included in the preliminary release and is
only added in the final number. The yearly aggregates for EU-15 and EMU-11
are a simple sum of national GDP. For the quarterly accounts, the aggregation is
more complex since some countries (Greece, Ireland, and Luxembourg) do not
yet produce quarterly national accounts data. Moreover, Portugal produces only
partial quarterly accounts with a significant lag. Thus, both the EU-15 and EMU-11
quarterly paths are the result of estimates from quarterly data based on a group of
countries accounting for more than 95% of total EU GDP (see the Foreword for a
detailed description of the weights of each country in the EU).
                              M3

                              M3 is a broad measure of money supply, which includes everything from notes
                              and coins to bank deposits. The ECB closely monitors M3 as they view it as a key
                              measure of inflation. At its session in December 1998, the governing council of the
                              ECB set its first reference value for M3 growth at 4.5%. This value supports inflation
                              below 2%, trend growth of 2% to 2.5%, and a long-term decline in the velocity
                              of money by 0.5% to 1%. The growth rate is monitored on a three-month moving
                              average basis in order to prevent monthly volatility to distort the information given
                              by the aggregate. The ECB's approach to monetary targeting leaves considerable
                              room for maneuver and interpretation. Because the ECB does not impose bands
                              on M3 growth, as the Bundesbank used to do, there will be no automatic action
                              when M3 growth diverges from the reference value. Moreover, although the ECB
                              considers M3 to be the key indicator, it will also take into account the changes in
                              other monetary aggregates.

                              Individual Country Budget Deficits

                              The Stability and Growth Pact states that budget deficits for every country in the

                              monetary union must be kept below 3% of GDP. Failure to meet these targets will

                              be punished. However through the years many Eurozone nations have had deficits

222                           in excess of 3% and penalties have not been enforced.

CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)
                                                                               CHAPTER 28

   Currency Profile:
   British Pound (GBP)

 Broad Economic Overview

                                                                                                                223
               The United Kingdom is the world's fifth largest economy with GDP valued at
               approximately US$3 trillion in 2014 according to the IMF. With one of the most
               dynamic central banks in the world, the UK economy benefited from many years of
               strong growth, low unemployment, expanding output, and resilient consumption.
               The strength of consumer consumption has been largely due to the strong housing
               market. The United Kingdom is a service-oriented economy, with manufacturing
               representing an increasingly smaller portion of GDP, now equivalent to only one-
               fifth of national output. Their capital market system is one of the most developed
               in the world, with finance and banking being the strongest contributors to GDP.
               Although the majority of the UK's GDP is from services, it is also one of the
               largest producers and exporters of natural gas in the European Union. The energy
               production industry accounts for 10% of GDP, which is one of the highest shares of
               any industrialized nation. This is particularly important, as increases in energy prices
               (such as oil) will significantly benefit the large number of UK oil exporters. (The
               United Kingdom became a net oil importer for a brief period due to disruptions in
               the North Sea in 2003, but it has already resumed its status as a net oil exporter.)

                  Overall, the United Kingdom is a net importer of goods with a consistent
               trade deficit. Its largest trading partner is the EU, with trade between the two
               constituencies accounting for over 50% of all of the country's import and export
               activities. The United States, on an individual basis, still remains the United
                                       Kingdom's largest trading partner. The breakdowns of the most important trading
                                       partners for the United Kingdom are the following:

                                       Leading Export Markets
                                       1. United States
                                       2. Germany
                                       3. Switzerland
                                       4. Netherlands
                                       5. France

                                       Leading Import Sources

                                       1. Germany
                                       2. Netherlands
                                       3. China
                                       4. United States
                                       5. France

                                       Since the launch of the euro in 1999, the single currency's troubles have become

                                       increasingly apparent, and this has made the UK's decision to maintain its own

                                       currency and monetary authority increasingly intelligent. Yet the possibility of euro

                                       adoption will remain a question in the minds of pound traders for many years

224                                    to come, although in 2015 into 2016, the more relevant question is whether the

                                       United Kingdom will remain in the EMU. A decision on euro entry has significant

CURRENCY PROFILE: BRITISH POUND (GBP)  ramifications for the UK economy--the most important of which is that UK interest

                                       rates would have to be adjusted to reflect the equivalent interest rate of the Eurozone.

                                       One of the primary arguments against adopting the euro is that the UK government

                                       has sound macroeconomic policies that have worked very well for the country for

                                       decades. Its successful monetary and fiscal policies have led it to outperform most

                                       major economies during economic downturns, including the European Union.

                                       The UK Treasury has previously specified five economic tests that must be met

                                       prior to euro entry, which are the following:

                                       UK's Five Economic Tests for Euro
                                       1. Is there sustainable convergence in business cycles and economic structures

                                           between the United Kingdom and other EMU members, so that the UK citizens
                                           could live comfortably with euro interest rates on a permanent basis?
                                       2. Is there enough flexibility to cope with economic change?
                                       3. Would joining the EMU create an environment that would encourage firms to
                                           invest in the United Kingdom?
                                       4. Would joining the EMU have a positive impact on the competitiveness of the
                                           UK's financial services industry?
                                       5. Would joining the EMU be good for promoting stability and growth in
                                           employment?
   The United Kingdom is a very political country where government officials are
highly concerned with voter approval. If voters do not support euro entry, the
likelihood of EMU entry would decline. The following are some of the arguments
for and against adopting the euro:

Arguments in Favor of Adopting the Euro
 There would be reduced exchange rate uncertainty for UK businesses and lower

  exchange rate transaction costs or risks.

 The prospect of sustained low inflation under the governance of the European
  Central Bank should reduce long-term interest rates and stimulate sustained
  economic growth.

 Single currency promotes price transparency.

 The integration of national financial markets of the EU will lead to higher efficiency
  in the allocation of capital in Europe.

 The euro is the second most important reserve currency after the USD.

 With the United Kingdom joining the euro, the political clout of the EMU would
  increase dramatically.

Arguments against Adopting the Euro                                                                 225

 Currency unions have collapsed in the past.                                                        CURRENCY PROFILE: BRITISH POUND (GBP)

 Economic or political instabilities of one country would impact the Euro, which
  would have exchange rate ramifications for otherwise healthy countries.

 Strict EMU criteria outlined by the Stability and Growth Pact.

 Entry would mean a permanent transfer of domestic monetary authority to the
  European Central Bank.

 Joining a currency union with no monetary flexibility would require the United
  Kingdom to have more flexibility in the labor and housing markets.

 There are fears about which countries might dominate the ECB.

 Adjusting to new currency will require large transaction costs.

 Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers-- Bank
   of England

               For the United Kingdom, the Bank of England (BoE) controls monetary policy, and
               the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) is a nine-member committee responsible
               for setting interest rate policy in the United Kingdom. It consists of a governor,
               two deputy governors, two executive directors of the central bank, and four outside
                                       experts. The committee was granted operational independence in 1997, which
                                       means they won't be influenced by the governing party. Despite this independence,
                                       monetary policies have centered on achieving an inflation target dictated by the
                                       Chancellor of the Treasury. Currently, this target is RPIX (Retail Price Index)
                                       inflation of 2.5%. The central bank has the power to change interest rates to levels
                                       that will allow them to meet this target. The MPC holds monthly meetings, which
                                       are closely followed for announcements on changes in monetary policy, including
                                       changes in the interest rate (bank repo rate). When no changes are made, no details
                                       are provided. In this case, the rate decision is generally a nonevent for the currency,
                                       with traders shifting their focus to the minutes released two weeks later.

                                          The MPC publishes statements after every meeting, along with a quarterly
                                       Inflation Report that details the MPC's two-year forecast for growth and inflation
                                       along with justification for policy movements. In addition, another publication,
                                       the Quarterly Bulletin, provides information on past monetary policy movements
                                       and analysis of the international economic environment and its impacts on the UK
                                       economy. All of these reports can provide guidance of future policy changes. The
                                       main policy tools used by the MPC and BoE are the following.

                                       Bank Repo Rate

226                                    This is the key rate used in monetary policy to meet the Treasury's inflation target.

                                       This rate is set for the Bank's own operations in the market, such as its short-term

CURRENCY PROFILE: BRITISH POUND (GBP)  lending activities. Changes to this rate affect the rates set by the commercial banks

                                       for their savers and borrowers. In turn, this rate will affect spending and output in

                                       the economy, and eventually costs and prices. An increase in this rate would imply

                                       an attempt to curb inflation and slow growth, while a decrease in this rate would be

                                       aimed at stimulating growth and expansion.

                                       Open Market Operations

                                       The goal of open market operations is to implement changes in the bank repo rate,
                                       while assuring adequate liquidity in the market and continued stability in the banking
                                       system. This is reflective of the three main objectives of the BoE: maintaining the
                                       integrity and value of the currency, maintaining the stability of the financial system,
                                       and seeking to ensure the effectiveness of the United Kingdom's financial services.
                                       To ensure liquidity, the Bank conducts daily open market operations to buy or sell
                                       short-term government fixed-income instruments. If this is not sufficient to meet
                                       liquidity needs, the Bank would also conduct additional overnight operations.

                                       Important Characteristics of the British Pound

                                        GBPUSD is very liquid. The GBPUSD is one of the most liquid currencies in the
                                         world, with 6% of all currency trading involving the British pound as either
                                         the base or counter currency. It is also one of the three most liquid currencies
  alongside EURUSD and USDJPY. One of the reasons for the currency's liquidity                      CURRENCY PROFILE: BRITISH POUND (GBP)
  is the country's highly developed capital markets. Many foreign investors seeking
  opportunities other than the United States have sent their funds to the United
  Kingdom for investment. In order to create these transactions, foreigners will
  need to sell their local currency and buy British pounds.

 GBP has three names. The UK's currency has three names: the British pound,
  sterling, and cable. All of these are used interchangeably.

 GBP is laden with speculators. At the time of publication, the British pound has one
  of the highest interest rates among the developed nations. Although Australia
  and New Zealand have higher interest rates, their financial markets are not as
  developed as that of the United Kingdom. As a result, many investors who already
  have positions or are interested in initiating new carry trades positions frequently
  use the GBP as the lending currency and will go long the pound against currencies
  such as the U.S. dollar, Japanese yen, and Swiss franc. A carry trade involves
  buying or lending a currency with a higher interest and selling or borrowing a
  currency with a lower interest rate. In recent years, carry trades have increased in
  popularity, which helped spur demand for the British pound. However, should the
  interest rate yield differential between the pound and other currencies narrow,
  an exodus of carry traders will increase volatility in the British pound.

 Interest rate differentials between Gilts and foreign bonds are closely followed. Interest rate 227
  differentials between UK Gilts--U.S. Treasuries and UK Gilts and German Bunds
  are widely watched by FX market participants. Gilts versus Treasuries can be a
  barometer of GBPUSD flows, while Gilts versus Bunds can be used as a barometer
  for EURGBP flows. More specifically, these interest rate differentials indicate how
  much premium yield UK fixed-income assets are offering over U.S. and European
  (German Bunds are usually used as a barometer for European yield) fixed-income
  assets, or vice versa. This differential provides traders with indications of potential
  capital flow or currency movements, as global investors are always shifting their
  capital in search of the assets with the highest yields. The United Kingdom can
  provide these yields with the safety of having the same credit stability as the United
  States.

 Euro sterling futures can give indications for interest rate movements. Since the UK
  interest rate or bank repo rate is the primary tool used in monetary policy, it is
  important to keep abreast of potential changes to the interest rate. Comments
  from government officials is one way to gauge biases for potential rate changes,
  but the Bank of England is one of the only central banks that requires members
  of the Monetary Policy Committee to publish their specific voting records.
  This personal accountability indicates that comments by individual committee
  members represent their own opinions and not that of the BoE. Therefore,
  it is necessary to look for other indication of potential BoE rate movements.
  Three-month euro sterling futures reflect market expectations on euro sterling
                                       FIGURE 28.1 GBPUSD 10-Year Chart
                                       Source: eSignal

                                       interest rates three months into the future. These contracts are also useful in

                                       predicting UK interest rate changes, which will ultimately affect the fluctuations

228                                    of the GBPUSD. Figure 28.1 illustrates 10 year performance of GBP-USD.

CURRENCY PROFILE: BRITISH POUND (GBP)   Comments on euro by UK politicians will impact the euro. Any speeches, remarks

                                       (especially from the Prime Minister or Treasury Chancellor), or polls in regards

                                       to the euro will impact currency trade. Indication of adoption of the euro tends

                                       to put downward pressure on GBP, while further opposition to euro entry will

                                       typically boost the GBP. Reason being that in order for the GBP to come in line

                                       with the euro, interest rates would have to decline and monetary policy would

                                       have to be subjected to a foreign entity. A decrease in the interest rate would

                                       induce carry trade investors to close their positions or sell pounds. The GBPUSD

                                       would also decline because of the uncertainties involved with Euro adoption. The

                                       UK economy is performing very well under the direction of its current monetary

                                       authority. The EMU is currently encountering many difficulties with member

                                       countries breaching EMU criteria. With one monetary authority dictating 19

                                       countries (plus UK would be 20), the EMU has yet to prove that they have

                                       developed a monetary policy suitable for all member states.

                                        GBP has positive correlation with energy prices. The UK houses some of the largest
                                         energy companies in the world, including British Petroleum. Energy production
                                         represents 10% of GDP. As a result, the British pound tends to have a positive
                                         correlation with energy prices. Specifically, since many members of the EU
                                         import oil from the United Kingdom, as oil prices increase, they will, in turn,
                                         have to buy more pounds to fund their energy purchases. In addition, rises in the
                                         price of oil will also benefit the earnings of the nations' energy exporters.
                GBP crosses. Although the GBP/USD is a more liquid currency than EURGBP,              CURRENCY PROFILE: BRITISH POUND (GBP)
                 EURGBP is typically the leading gauge for GBP strength. The GBPUSD currency
                 pair tends to be more sensitive to U.S. developments, while EURGBP is a
                 more pure fundamental pound trade since Europe is Britain's primary trade
                 and investment partner. However, both currencies are naturally interdependent,
                 which means movements in the EURGBP can affect movements in the GBPUSD.
                 The reverse is also true--that is, movements in GBPUSD will also affect trading
                 in EURGBP. Therefore, it is important for pound traders to be consciously aware
                 of the trading behavior of both currency pairs. The EURGBP rate should be
                 exactly equal to the EURUSD divided by the GBPUSD rate. Small differences in
                 these rates are often exploited by market participants and quickly eliminated.

 Important Economic Indicators
   for the United Kingdom

               All of the following indicators are important for the United Kingdom. However,
               since the United Kingdom is primarily a service-oriented economy, it is particularly
               important to pay attention to service sector data.

             PMIs
               Every month, Markit Economics releases the PMI indices for the manufacturing, 229
               service, and construction sectors. These numbers are extremely market moving
               because they provide the most up-to-date information on how each of the economies
               is performing in the current month and not how the economies performed
               the previous month, like many other reports. However since the reports are for the
               current period, they are usually subject to revisions, so the euro will move on the
               preliminary and secondary reports. A reading above 50 represents expansion, and a
               reading below 50 represents contraction. For the United Kingdom, the PMI services
               index is the most important, along with the composite index, which aggregates how
               the manufacturing and service sector are performing.

             Employment Situation

               The employment report is a monthly survey of the labor market conducted by
               the Office of National Statistics. The objectives of the survey are to divide the
               working-age population into three separate classifications (employed, unemployed,
               and not in the labor force), and to provide descriptive and explanatory data on each of
               these categories. Data from the survey provide market participants with information
               on major labor market trends such as shifts in employment across industrial sectors,
               hours worked, labor force participation, and unemployment rates. The timeliness
               of the survey makes it a closely watched statistic by the currency market as it is a
               good barometer of the strength of the UK economy and an important input into
               monetary policy.
                                       Retail Sales

                                       The key to growth is consumer spending, and for this reason, the retail sales report
                                       is also extremely market moving. The Retail Sales Index measures the total goods
                                       sold by a sampling of retail stores over the course of a month. This index is used as
                                       a gauge of consumer consumption and consumer confidence. While retail sales can
                                       be quite volatile due to seasonality, it is one of the most important indicators on the
                                       health of the economy, along with a key input for GDP.

                                       Consumer or Retail Price Index

                                       CPI or RPI is a measure of the change in prices of a basket of consumer goods. The
                                       markets however focus on the underlying RPI or RPI-X, which excludes mortgage
                                       interest payments. The RPI-X is closely watched as the treasury sets inflation targets
                                       for the BoE, currently defined as 2.5% annual growth in RPI-X.

                                       GDP

                                       GDP is a quarterly report conducted by the Bureau of Statistics. GDP is a measure

                                       of the total production and consumption of goods and services in the UK. GDP

                                       is measured by adding expenditures by households, businesses, government, and

230                                    net foreign purchases. The GDP price deflator is used to convert output measured
                                       at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. The data are used to gauge where in

CURRENCY PROFILE: BRITISH POUND (GBP)  the business cycle the United Kingdom finds itself. Fast growth often is perceived

                                       as inflationary, while low (or negative) growth indicates a recessionary or weak

                                       growth.

                                       Industrial Production

                                       The industrial production (IP) index measures the change in output in the United
                                       Kingdom of manufacturing; mining and quarrying; and electricity, gas, and water
                                       supply. Output refers to the physical quantity of items produced, unlike sales value,
                                       which combines quantity and price. The index covers the production of goods and
                                       power for domestic sales in the United Kingdom and for export. Because IP is
                                       responsible for close to a quarter of gross domestic product, IP is widely watched as
                                       it can provide good insight into the current state of the economy.

                                       UK Housing Starts

                                       Housing starts measures the number of residential building construction projects
                                       that have begun during any particular month. This is important for the United
                                       Kingdom as the housing market is the primary industry that sustains the economy.
                                                                               CHAPTER 29

   Currency Profile:
   Swiss Franc (CHF)

 Broad Economic Overview

                                                                                                                231
               Switzerland is the twentieth largest economy in the world, with a GDP valued at
               over US$685 billion as of 2014. Although the economy is relatively small, it is one of
               the wealthiest in the world on a GDP per capita basis. The country is prosperous and
               technologically advanced with economic and political stability that rivals many larger
               economies. The country's prosperity stems primarily from technological expertise
               in manufacturing, tourism, and banking. More specifically, Switzerland is known for
               their chemicals and pharmaceuticals industries, machinery, precision instruments,
               watches, and a financial system historically known for protecting the confidentiality
               of its investors. This coupled with the country's lengthy history of political neutrality
               earned Switzerland the Swiss franc safe haven status and as a direct result of that,
               it is the one world's most popular destinations for offshore capital. Even when the
               central bank introduced a temporary 1.20 EURCHF peg and lowered interest rates
               to negative levels, Switzerland still managed to attract safe haven flows.

                  It is estimated that Switzerland holds over US$2 trillion in offshore assets as of
               2014 and attracts over 35% of the world's private wealth management business.
               A large and highly advanced banking and insurance industry has developed to support
               this demand, and the sector employs over 50% of the population and comprises over
               70% of total GDP. Since Switzerland's financial industry thrives on its safe haven
               status and renowned confidentiality, capital flows tend to drive the economy during
               times of global risk aversion, while trade flows drive the economy in a risk-seeking
                                     environment. Trade flows are extremely important, with nearly two thirds of all
                                     trade conducted with Europe. With this in mind, Switzerland's most important
                                     trading partners are the following:

                                     Leading Export Markets
                                     1. Germany
                                     2. India
                                     3. United States
                                     4. Hong Kong
                                     5. France

                                     Leading Import Sources

                                     1. Germany
                                     2. Italy
                                     3. United States
                                     4. France
                                     5. China

                                     Traditionally, Switzerland has a strong trade and current account surplus that

                                     lends support to the currency. Most of the surplus can be attributed to the large

232                                  amount of foreign direct investment into the country, in seek of safety of capital,
                                     despite the low to negative yields offered by Switzerland.

CURRENCY PROFILE: SWISS FRANC (CHF)   Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers-- Swiss
                                        National Bank

                                                    Monetary policy in Switzerland is determined by the Swiss National Bank (SNB). They
                                                    are a completely independent authority with a three-person committee responsible
                                                    for determining monetary policy. This committee consists of a chairman, a vice
                                                    chairman, and one other (member) who constitute the Governing Board of the
                                                    SNB. Due to the small size of the committee, all decisions are based on a consensus
                                                    vote. The Board reviews monetary policy at least once a quarter, but decisions on
                                                    monetary policy can be made and announced at any point in time. Unlike most other
                                                    central banks, the SNB does not set one official interest rate target, but instead sets
                                                    a target range for their three-month Swiss Libor rate.

                                                  Central Bank's Goals

                                                    In December of 1999, the SNB shifted from focusing on monetary targets (M3) to an
                                                    inflation target of less than 2% inflation per year. This measure is taken based on the
                                                    national consumer price index. Monetary targets still remain important indicators
and are closely watched by the central bank, because they provide information on        CURRENCY PROFILE: SWISS FRANC (CHF)
the long-term inflation. This new inflation focus also increases the central bank's
transparency. In their mandate, they have clearly stated, ``Should inflation exceed
2% in the medium term, the National Bank will tend to tighten its monetary stance.''
If there is danger of deflation, the National Bank would loosen monetary policy. The
SNB also closely monitors exchange rates, as excessive strength in the Swiss franc
can cause inflationary conditions. This is especially true in environments of global
risk aversion, as capital flows into Switzerland increases significantly during those
times. As a result, the SNB typically favors a weak franc, and is not hesitant to use
intervention as liquidity tool. SNB officials intervene in the franc using a variety of
methods including verbal remarks on liquidity, money supply, and the currency.

Their Tools

The most commonly used tools by the SNB to implement monetary policy include
the following.

Target Interest Rate Range

Traditionally, the SNB implements monetary policy by setting a target range for
their three-month interest rate known as the Swiss Franc Libor rate. According
to the SNB, ``The Libor is a reference interest rate in the interbank market for
unsecured loans.'' It is a trimmed mean of the rates charged by 12 leading banks and 233
is published daily by the British Bankers' Association. The National Bank publishes
its target range regularly. As a rule, this range extends over 1 percentage point,
and the SNB generally aims to keep the Libor in the middle of the range. The SNB
undertakes quarterly economic and monetary assessments at which it reviews its
monetary policy. If circumstances so require, it will also adjust the Libor target
range in between these quarterly assessments. It sets out the reasons for its decisions
in press releases.

Open Market Operations

Repo transactions are the SNB's major monetary policy instrument. A repo
transaction involves a cash taker (borrower) selling securities to a cash provider
(lender), while agreeing to repurchase the securities of the same type and quantity
at a later date. This structure is similar to a secured loan, whereby the cash taker
must pay the cash provider interest. These repo transactions tend to have very short
maturities ranging from one day to a few weeks. The SNB uses these repo transactions
to manipulate undesirable moves in the three-month Libor rate. To prevent increases
in the three-month Libor rate above the SNB's target, the bank would supply the
commercial banks with additional liquidity through repo transactions at lower repo
rates, and in essence create additional liquidity. Conversely, the SNB can reduce
liquidity or induce increases in the three-month Libor rate by increasing repo rates.
                                        In addition to the quarterly monetary policy decision, the SNB publishes a
                                     Quarterly Bulletin with a detailed assessment of the current state of the economy
                                     and a review of monetary policy. A Monthly Bulletin is also published containing a
                                     short review of economic developments. These reports are important to watch, as
                                     they may contain information on changes in the SNB's assessment of economy and
                                     guidance on monetary policy.

                                     1.20 EUR/CHF Peg Implementation and Abandonment

                                     Few would have expected that one of the seminal developments in the forex market

                                     was the Swiss National Bank's decision to implement and later abandon its 1.20

                                     EURCHF peg. This decision transformed the foreign exchange industry, bankrupted

                                     many brokers, and led to tighter regulations across the globe. Faced with a high level

                                     of uncertainty in the financial markets, an overvalued currency and deflation risks

                                     in 2011, the SNB introduced a minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro. At

                                     the time, it pledged to sell francs in an unlimited quantity to maintain the peg. The

                                     goal was to stabilize the Swiss economy by capping the gain in the franc. However,

                                     in January 2015, the prospect of quantitative easing from the European Central

                                     Bank pushed the SNB to abandon the peg. It also accumulated significant foreign

                                     exchange reserves that irritated critics, but more importantly, the franc became less

                                     overvalued through the years, giving the SNB fewer reasons to maintain the peg.

234                                  SNB's decision was a complete surprise, and caused a 30% drop in EURCHF in

CURRENCY PROFILE: SWISS FRANC (CHF)  a single day. Many foreign exchange brokers were unprepared for the move and

                                     experienced massive losses as a result.

                                      Important Characteristics of the Swiss Franc

                                                     Safe haven status. This is perhaps the most unique characteristic of the Swiss franc.
                                                      Switzerland's safe haven status is continually stressed because this and the secrecy
                                                      of the banking system are the key advantages of Switzerland. The Swiss franc
                                                      moves primarily on external events rather than domestic economic conditions.
                                                      That is, as mentioned earlier, due to its political neutrality, the franc is considered
                                                      the world's premier safe haven currency. Therefore, in times of global instability
                                                      and/or uncertainty, investors tend to be more concerned with capital retention
                                                      than appreciation. At such times, funds will flow into Switzerland, which would
                                                      cause the Swiss franc to appreciate regardless of whether growth conditions are
                                                      favorable.

                                                     Swiss franc is closely correlated with gold. Switzerland is the world's third largest
                                                      official holder of gold. In the past, a Swiss constitutional mandate required the
                                                      currency to be backed 40% with gold reserves. The mandate is now removed
                                                      but the positive correlation between the Swiss franc and gold remains because
  the relationship has been engrained into the minds of forex traders; therefore,                   CURRENCY PROFILE: SWISS FRANC (CHF)
  both gold and the Swiss franc are perceived as safe haven instruments. Before the
  SNB abandoned the EURCHF 1.20, Swiss franc had an 80% positive correlation
  with gold. These days, the correlation is still there but in a smaller magnitude.
  Generally speaking, if the price of gold appreciates, the Swiss franc has a high
  likelihood of rising in value. In addition, since gold is also viewed as the ultimate
  safe haven form of money, both gold and the Swiss franc benefit during periods
  of global economic and geopolitical uncertainty.

 Carry trades effects. With one of the lowest interest rates in the industrialized world,
  over the past few years, the Swiss franc has become one of the most popular
  funding currencies for carry trades. As mentioned in this book, the popularity of
  carry trades has increased significantly over the past two decades, as investors are
  actively seeking high yield. A carry trade involves buying or lending a currency
  with a high interest rate and selling or borrowing a currency with a low interest
  rate. With CHF having one of the lowest interest rates of all industrialized
  countries, it is one of the primary currencies sold or borrowed in carry trades.
  This results in the need to sell CHF against a higher yielding currency. Carry
  trades are typically done in cross-currencies such as GBPCHF or AUDCHF, but
  these trades can impact both EURCHF and USDCHF. The unwinding of carry
  trades involves the need for investors to buy back the Swiss franc.
                                                                                                 235

 Interest rate differentials between euro Swiss futures and foreign interest rate futures are
  closely followed. One of the favorite indicators of professional Swiss franc traders
  is the interest rate differential between three-month euro Swiss futures and
  eurodollar futures. These differentials can provide guidance on potential money
  flows as they indicate how much premium yield U.S. fixed-income assets are
  offering over Swiss fixed-income assets, or vice versa. This differential provides
  traders with indications of potential currency movements, as investors are always
  looking for assets with the highest yields. This is particularly important to carry
  traders who enter and exit their positions based on the positive interest rate
  differentials between global fixed-income assets.

 Potential changes in banking regulations. Over the past few years members of the
  European Union have been exerting significant pressure on Switzerland to relax
  the confidentiality of their banking system and to increase transparency of their
  customers' accounts. The European Union is pressing this issue because of its
  active measures to persecute EU tax evaders. This should be a concern for many
  years to come. However, this is a difficult decision for Switzerland to make because
  the confidentiality of their customers' accounts represents the core strength of
  their banking system. The EU has threatened to impose severe sanctions on
  Switzerland if they do not comply with their proposed measures. Both countries
  are currently working to negotiate an equitable resolution. Any news or talk of
                                     changing banking regulations will impact both Switzerland's economy and the
                                     Swiss franc.

                                      Mergers and acquisition activity. Switzerland's primary industry is banking and
                                       finance. In this industry, merger and acquisition activities (M&A) are very
                                       common, especially as consolidation continues in the overall industry. As a result,
                                       these M&A activities can have significant impact on the Swiss franc. If foreign
                                       firms purchase Swiss banks or insurance companies, they will need to buy Swiss
                                       francs and in turn, sell their local currency. If Swiss banks purchase foreign firms,
                                       they would need to sell Swiss francs and buy the foreign currency. Either way,
                                       it is important for Swiss franc traders to frequently watch for notices on M&A
                                       activity involving Swiss firms.

                                      Trading behavior, cross currency characteristics. The EURCHF is the most commonly

                                     traded currency for traders who want to participate in CHF movements. USDCHF

                                     is less frequently traded because of its greater illiquidity and volatility. However,

                                     day traders may tend to favor USDCHF over EURCHF because of its volatile

                                     movements. In actuality, the USDCHF is a synthetic currency derived from

                                     EURUSD and EURCHF because more transactions are done between the euro

                                     and Swiss franc. Market makers or professional traders tend to use those pairs as

                                     leading indicators for trading USDCHF or to price the current USDCHF level

236                                  when the currency pair is illiquid. Theoretically, the USDCHF rate should be

                                     exactly equal to the EURCHF rate divided by EURUSD. Only during times of

CURRENCY PROFILE: SWISS FRANC (CHF)  unusual circumstances, such as the Iraq War, September 11, or the EURCHF peg,

                                     will USDCHF develop a market of its own. Any small differences in these rates

                                     are quickly exploited by market participants. Figure 29.1 highlights the 10 year

                                     performance of EUR-CHF.

                                      Important Economic Indicators for Switzerland

                                                    Economic data from Switzerland tends to have limited impact on the currency, but
                                                    these are the most important pieces of Swiss data.

                                                  KoF Leading Indicators

                                                    The KoF leading indicators report is released by the Swiss Institute for Business
                                                    Cycle Research. This index is generally used to gauge the future health of the
                                                    Swiss economy. It contains six components: (1) change in manufacturers' orders;
                                                    (2) the expected purchase plans of manufacturers over the next three months; (3)
                                                    the judgment of stocks in wholesale business; (4) consumer perception of their
                                                    financial conditions; (5) backlog in the construction sector; and (6) orders backlog
                                                    for manufacturers.
                                  237

FIGURE 29.1 EURCHF 10-Year Chart  CURRENCY PROFILE: SWISS FRANC (CHF)
Source: eSignal
                                     Consumer Price Index

                                     The Consumer Price Index is calculated monthly, on the basis of retail prices paid in
                                     Switzerland. In accordance with prevalent international practice, the commodities
                                     covered are distinguished according to the consumption concept, which includes in
                                     the calculation of the CPI of those goods and services that are part of the private
                                     consumption aggregate according to the National Accounts. The basket of goods does
                                     not include transfer expenditure such as direct taxation, social insurance contributions,
                                     and health insurance premiums. The index is a key measure of inflation.

                                     Gross Domestic Product

                                     GDP is a measure of the total production and consumption of goods and services in
                                     the Switzerland. GDP is measured by adding expenditures by households, businesses,
                                     government, and net foreign purchases. The GDP price deflator is used to convert
                                     output measured at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. The data are used
                                     to gauge where in the business cycle Switzerland finds itself. Fast growth often is
                                     perceived as inflationary, while low (or negative) growth indicates a recessionary or
                                     weak growth period.

                                     Balance of Payments

238                                  Balance of payments is the collective term for the accounts of Swiss transactions

CURRENCY PROFILE: SWISS FRANC (CHF)  with the rest of the world. The current account is the balance of trade plus services

                                     portion. BoP is an important indicator for Swiss traders, as Switzerland has always

                                     kept a strong current account balance. Any changes to the current account, positive

                                     or negative, could see substantial flows.

                                     Production Index (Industrial Production)

                                     The production index is a quarterly measure of the change in the volume of industrial
                                     production (or physical output by producers).

                                     Retail Sales

                                     Switzerland's retail sales report is released on a monthly basis 40 days after the
                                     reference month. The report is an important indicator of consumer spending habits
                                     and is not seasonally adjusted.
                                                                               CHAPTER 30

   Currency Profile:
   Japanese Yen (JPY)

 Economic Overview

               Japan is the third largest economy in the world with GDP valued at over US$4.6 239
               trillion in 2014 (behind the United States and China). If we count the European
               Union as a whole, it would be considered the fourth largest economy. Japan is one of
               the world's largest exporters and is responsible for over US$690 billion in exports
               per year. Manufacturing and exports of products such as electronics and cars are the
               signature drivers of the economy, accounting for nearly 17% of GDP. As a result,
               Japanese growth is extremely sensitive to the value of the currency. For many years,
               Japan has maintained a trade surplus, but the earthquake followed by tsunami in
               2011 turned the country into a net oil importer and created a long period of trade
               imbalances, where oil imports exceeded exports in value. This began to change in
               early 2015, when a weakening yen and falling oil prices helped to turn around trade
               activity, returning Japan to a surplus nation. Having a trade surplus means that there
               will be inherent demand for the Japanese yen even when interest rates are low
               and there are structural deficiencies. Japan's most important trade partners are the
               United States and China:
               Leading Export Markets
               1. China
               2. United States
               3. South Korea
               4. Taiwan
               5. Hong Kong
                                      Leading Import Sources:
                                      1. China
                                      2. United States
                                      3. South Korea
                                      4. Australia
                                      5. Saudi Arabia

                                       Abenomics

                                      In the 1980s, Japan's capital market was one of the most attractive markets for

                                      international investors seeking investment opportunities in Asia. Japan had the most

                                      developed capital markets in the region, and its banking system was considered to

                                      be the one of the strongest in the world. At the time, the country was experiencing

                                      above-trend economic growth and near zero inflation. This resulted in rapid

                                      growth expectations, boosted asset prices, and rapid credit expansion, leading to the

                                      development of an asset bubble. Between 1990 and 1997, the asset bubble collapsed,

                                      inducing a US$10 trillion decline in asset prices, with the fall in real estate values

                                      accounting for nearly 65% of the total decline, nearly two years of national output.

                                      This fall in asset prices sparked the banking crisis in Japan. It began in the early

240                                   1990s and developed into a full-blown systemic crisis in 1997 following the failure

                                      of a number of high-profile financial institutions. Many of these banks and financial

CURRENCY PROFILE: JAPANESE YEN (JPY)  institutions extended loans to builders and real estate developers at the height of

                                      the asset bubble in the 1980s, with land as collateral. A number of these developers

                                      defaulted after the asset bubble collapse, leaving the country's banks saddled with

                                      bad debt and collateral worth sometimes 60% to 80% less than when the loans

                                      were taken out. Due to the large size of these banking institutions and their role in

                                      corporate funding, the crisis had profound effects on Japan and the global economy.

                                      Enormous bad debts, falling stock prices, and a collapsing real estate sector crippled

                                      Japan's economy for more than two decades.

                                      It was not until the rollout of Abenomics that the economy began to turn around.

                                      When Shinzo Abe became prime minister for the second time in 2012, he rolled out

                                      a three-pronged plan to stimulate growth and pull the economy out of stagnation

                                      through monetary policy, fiscal policy, and economic growth strategies. This was

                                      known as Abenomics. In the first few weeks of the program, Abe announced a massive

                                      stimulus package that involved significant government spending and a strong dose

                                      of quantitative easing. The effects were almost immediate, with the Japanese yen

                                      falling significantly across the board. Not soon after, the unemployment rate started

                                      to fall and growth slowly returned.
 Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers                                                                    CURRENCY PROFILE: JAPANESE YEN (JPY)

               Monetary policy in Japan is determined by the Bank of Japan (BoJ). In 1998, the
               Japanese government passed laws giving the BoJ operational independence from the
               Ministry of Finance (MoF) and complete control over monetary policy. However,
               despite the government's attempts to decentralize decision making, the MoF still
               remains in charge of foreign exchange policy. The BoJ is responsible for executing
               all official Japanese foreign exchange transactions at the direction of the MoF. The
               Bank of Japan's Policy Board consists of the BoJ governor, two deputy governors,
               and six other members. Monetary policy meetings are held twice a month, with
               briefings and press releases provided immediately. The BoJ also publishes a Monthly
               Report issued by the Policy Board, and a Monthly Economic Report. These reports
               are important to watch for changes in BoJ sentiment and signals of new monetary
               or fiscal policy measures, as the government is constantly trying to develop fresh
               initiatives to stimulate growth.

                  The MoF and the BoJ are very important institutions, and they both can
               influence currency movements. Since the MoF is the director of foreign exchange
               interventions, it is important to watch and keep abreast of the comments made
               from MoF officials. Being an export driven economy, the government tends to favor
               a weaker currency. So if the Japanese yen appreciates significantly or too rapidly
               against the dollar, members of the BoJ and MoF will become increasingly vocal about 241
               their concerns or disapproval in regards to its current level or recent movements.
               These comments can affect how the yen moves, but if government officials flood the
               market with comments and there is no follow-up action, the market would start
               to become immune to these concerns. However, the MoF and BoJ have a lengthy
               history of interventions in the currency markets to manipulate the value of the yen
               value in Japan's best interests, so their comments cannot be completely ignored.

                  The most popular tool that the BoJ uses to control monetary policy is open
               market operations.

             Open Market Operations

               These activities are focused on controlling the uncollateralized overnight call rate.
               The Bank of Japan has maintained a zero interest rate policy (ZIRP) for some time
               now, which means that the Bank of Japan cannot lower this rate further to stimulate
               growth, consumption, or liquidity. Therefore, in order to maintain zero interest
               rates, the BoJ has to manipulate liquidity through open market operations, targeting
               zero interest on the overnight call rate. It manipulates liquidity by the outright
               buying or selling of bills, repos, or Japanese government bonds. A repo transaction
                                      involves a cash taker (borrower) selling securities to a cash provider (lender), while
                                      agreeing to repurchase the securities of the same type and quantity at a later date.
                                      This structure is similar to a secured loan, whereby the cash taker must pay the
                                      cash provider interest. These repo transactions tend to have very short maturities,
                                      ranging from one day to a few weeks.

                                      Important Characteristics of the JPY

                                       Proxy for Asian strength/weakness. Japan tends to be seen as a proxy for broad Asian
                                        strength because the country has the largest GDP in Asia outside of China. With
                                        the most developed capital markets, Japan was once the primary destination for
                                        all investors who wanted access into the region. Japan also conducts a significant
                                        amount of trade with its Asian partners. As a result, economic problems or
                                        political instability in Japan tend to spill over into the other Asian countries.
                                        However, this spillover is not one-sided. Economic or political problems in
                                        other Asian economies, particularly China, can also have dramatic impacts on
                                        the Japanese economy and in turn movements in the Japanese yen. For example,
                                        North Korean political instability poses a great risk to Japan and the Japanese yen
                                        due to the country's geographic proximity.

                                       Bank of Japan intervention practices. The BoJ and MoF are active participants in

242                                   the foreign exchange markets. That is, they have a lengthy history of entering

                                      the FX markets if they are dissatisfied with the value of the Japanese yen. While

CURRENCY PROFILE: JAPANESE YEN (JPY)  they have not intervened since 2011, they won't be reluctant to do so if the

                                      currency strengthens significantly. As Japan is a very political economy, with

                                      close ties between government officials and principals of large private institutions,

                                      the MoF can have a very narrow segment in mind when it decides to intervene

                                      in the currency. Since the BoJ is such an active participant, it is very in tune

                                      with the market movements and its participants. Periodically, the BoJ receives

                                      information on large hedge fund positions from banks and likes to intervene when

                                      speculators are on the other side of the market, allowing them to get the most

                                      ``bang for the bucks.'' The MoF and BoJ always considers three main factors

                                      before intervention:

                                      1. Amount of appreciation/depreciation in JPY--Intervention has historically
                                          occurred when the yen moves by 7 or more yen in less than 6 weeks. Using
                                          the USDJPY as a barometer, 7 yen would be equivalent to 700 pips, which
                                          would represent a move from 120.00 to 127.00.

                                      2. Current USDJPY rate--Historically, only 11% of all BoJ interventions that
                                          were conducted to counter a strong JPY occurred above the 115 level.

                                      3. Speculative positions--In order to maximize the impact of intervention, the
                                          BoJ and MoF prefer to intervene when market participants hold massive
                                          positions in the opposing direction because the flow of stops will exacerbate
       the reversal in the currency pair. The CFTC provides a weekly report on                      CURRENCY PROFILE: JAPANESE YEN (JPY)
       existing speculative positions that can be found at www.cftc.gov.

 JPY movements are sensitive to time. The Japanese yen can be particularly active
  towards the end of Japan's fiscal year (March 31), as exporters repatriate their
  dollar denominated assets to window dress their balance sheets. This is particularly
  important for Japanese banks because they need to rebuild their balance sheets
  to meet FSA guidelines that require the banks to mark to market their security
  holdings. In anticipation of the need for repatriation-related purchases, Japanese
  yen speculators frequently bid the yen higher in attempt to take advantage of this
  increased inflow. As a result, following fiscal year end, the Japanese yen tends to
  have a bias toward depreciation as speculators close their positions.
     Aside from the fiscal year end, time is also a factor on a day-to-day basis.
  Unlike traders in London or New York who typically have lunch at their trading
  desk, Japanese traders tend to take hour-long lunches, leaving only a junior trader
  in the office. On occasion, this can translate into additional volatility in the yen
  during this period as the market becomes illiquid. In addition to this period, the
  JPY tends to move fairly orderly during Japanese and London hours, unless there
  are official comments or major surprises in economic data. During U.S. hours,
  however, the JPY tends to have higher volatility, as U.S. traders are actively
  engaging in dollar and yen positions.
                                                                                                 243

 Stocks and bonds have a positive correlation with USDJPY. The Nikkei has a positive
  correlation with USDJPY, which means that when the currency pair appreciating,
  equities are generally on the rise as well. For Japan, the currency typically leads
  equities because a weak yen is positive for the economy, but there can be times
  when equities lead currencies. The spread between U.S. 10-year Treasury and
  JGB yields is also very important for the currency. Typically, when the yield
  spread is on the rise, we see USDJPY move higher, and when the yield spread
  declines, it creates pressure on USDJPY. Figure 30.1 highlights the 10 year
  performance of USDJPY.

 Carry trade effects. The popularity of carry trades has increased in recent years, as
  investors are actively seeking high-yielding assets. With the Japanese yen having
  the lowest interest rate of all industrialized countries, it is the primary currency
  sold or borrowed in carry trades. The most popular carry trade currencies
  included GBPJPY, AUDJPY, NZDJPY, and even USDJPY. Carry traders would
  go short the Japanese yen against the higher yielding currencies. Unwinding of
  carry trades as result of spread narrowing is typically beneficial for the Japanese
  yen, as the reversal process involves purchasing the yen and buying back other
  currencies. Since there is so much demand to sell the yen for carry, in periods of
  risk aversion, these trades can be unwound quickly creating a significant rally in
  the currency.
                                       Important Economic Indicators for Japan

                                      Since Japan is a manufacturing-oriented economy, manufacturing data tend to have
                                      the most significant impact on the yen. However, on a monthly basis, unless there is
                                      a big surprise, Japanese data do not typically move the currency. The most influential
                                      event risk is always the monetary policy announcement and trade balance. Aside
                                      from that, these are the numbers to watch.

                                      Tankan Survey

                                      If there is one piece of Japanese data to follow, it should be the quarterly Tankan
                                      Report. The Tankan is an economic survey of Japanese enterprises published four
                                      times a year. The survey includes more than 9,000 enterprises, which are divided
                                      into four major groups: large, small, and medium-sized companies, as well as
                                      principal enterprises. The survey provides us with an overall impression of the
                                      business climate in Japan and is widely watched and anticipated by foreign exchange
                                      market participants.

                                      Balance of Payments

                                      The monthly balance of payments report provides investors with insight into Japan's

244                                   international economic transactions that include goods, services, investment income,

CURRENCY PROFILE: JAPANESE YEN (JPY)  and capital flows. The current account side of BoJ can be used a good gauge of

                                      international trade. Figures are released on a monthly and semiannual basis.

                                      Employment

                                      Employment figures are reported on a monthly basis by the Management and
                                      Coordination Agency of Japan. The employment release measures the number of
                                      jobs and unemployment rate for the country as a whole. The data are obtained
                                      through a statistical survey of the current labor force. This release is a closely
                                      watched economic indicator because of its timeliness and its importance as a leading
                                      indicator of economic activity.

                                      Industrial Production

                                      The industrial production (IP) index measures trends in the output of Japanese
                                      manufacturing, mining, and utilities companies. Output refers to the total quantity
                                      of items produced. The index covers the production of goods for domestic sales
                                      in Japan and for export. It excludes production in the agriculture, construction,
                                      transportation, communication, trade, finance, and service industries; government
                                      output; and imports. The IP index is then developed by weighting each component
                                      according to its relative importance during this base period. Investors feel IP and
                                  245

FIGURE 30.1 USDJPY 10-Year Chart  CURRENCY PROFILE: JAPANESE YEN (JPY)
Source: eSignal
                          inventory accumulation have strong correlations with total output and can provide
                          valuable insight into the current state of the economy.
                        GDP
                          Gross domestic product (GDP) is a broad measure of the total production and
                          consumption of goods and services measured over quarterly and yearly periods in
                          Japan. GDP is measured by adding total expenditures by households, businesses,
                          government, and net foreign purchases. The GDP price deflator is used to convert
                          output measured at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. Preliminary reports
                          are the most significant for FX market participants.

246

CURRENCY PROFILE: JAPANESE YEN (JPY)
                                                                               CHAPTER 31

   Currency Profile:
   Australian Dollar
   (AUD)

                                                                                                                247

 Broad Economic Overview

               Australia is the twelfth largest country in the world, with a gross domestic product
               of approximately US$1.5 trillion. In Asia, it ranks as the third largest economy
               in the region. On a relative basis, the economy is very small, only one-tenth
               that of the United States and less than one-fifth the size of China. However on a
               per capita basis, Australia ranks right up there with many industrialized Western
               European countries. Australia has a service-oriented economy with close to 70%
               of GDP coming from industries such as finance, property, and business services.
               However, the country has a trade deficit, with manufacturing dominating the
               country's exporting activities. Rural and mineral exports account for over 60% of all
               manufacturing exports and 12% of GDP. The economy is therefore highly sensitive
               to changes in commodity prices. As a country heavily dependent on exports, the
               pace of growth of Australia's largest trade partners is extremely important because
               downturns or rapid growth abroad can impact import and export demand. Here's a
               breakdown of Australia's most important trading partners:

               Largest Export Markets
               1. China
               2. Japan
                                           3. South Korea
                                           4. United States
                                           5. New Zealand

                                           Largest Import Sources

                                           1. China
                                           2. United States
                                           3. Japan
                                           4. Singapore
                                           5. Germany

                                           As you can see, Australia's number one trading partner is China. In fact, Chinese

                                           demand represents a third of the country's trade activity. In terms of products, the

                                           Chinese are major importers of Australian iron ore, coal, natural gas, and gold.

                                           Asia Pac is extremely important to Australia, as more than 70% of its exports are

                                           destined for countries within the region. This makes Australia's economy highly

                                           sensitive to the performance of countries in the Asian Pacific region. Hiccups in

                                           China's economy can have a significant impact on Australia, not only in terms of

                                           exporting activities but also on housing market activity. At the same time, growth in

                                           China is positive for Australia's economy. During the global financial crisis, exports

248                                        to China helped shelter Australia from a major downturn. The relationship between

                                           China and Australia is known as Sino-Australian relations. China has recently taken

CURRENCY PROFILE: AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR (AUD)  steps to produce its own resources, and if this trend continues, it could dramatically

                                           change the landscape of Australia's economy.

                                            Monetary and Fiscal Policy

                                                          The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) is the central bank of Australia. The monetary
                                                          policy committee within the central bank consists of the governor (chairman), the
                                                          deputy governor (vice chairman), secretary to the treasurer, and six independent
                                                          members appointed by the government. Changes to monetary policy are made on
                                                          consensus within the committee.

                                                        Central Bank's Goals

                                                          The RBA's charter states that the mandate of the Reserve Bank Board is to focus
                                                          monetary and banking policy on ensuring:

                                                          1. The stability of the currency of Australia;
                                                          2. The maintenance of full employment in Australia; and
                                                          3. The economic prosperity and welfare of the people of Australia
   In order to achieve these objectives, the government has set an informal consumer
price inflation target of 2% to 3% per year. The RBA believes that the key to long-
term sustainable growth in the economy is to control inflation, which would preserve
the value of money. In addition, an inflation target provides a discipline for monetary
policy making and guidelines for private-sector inflation expectations. This also
increases the transparency of the banks' activities. Should inflation or inflation
expectations exceed the 2% to 3% target, traders should know that it would raise
red flags at the RBA and prompt the central bank to favor a tighter monetary policy
or, in the other words, further rate hikes.

   Monetary policy decisions involve setting the interest rate on overnight loans
in the money market. Other interest rates in the economy are influenced by this
interest rate to varying degrees, so that the behavior of borrowers and lenders in
the financial markets is affected by monetary policy (though not only by monetary
policy). Through these channels, monetary policy affects the economy in pursuit of
the goals just outlined.

Cash Rate

The cash rate is the RBA's target rate for open market operations and is the rate
charged on overnight loans between financial intermediaries. This means the cash
rate should have a close relationship with the prevailing money market interest rates.
Changes in monetary policy directly affect the interest rate structure of the financial 249
system. They also affect sentiment in a currency. Figure 31.1 graphs the AUDUSD
                                                                                         CURRENCY PROFILE: AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR (AUD)
                 AUDUSD vs. AU-US 10 Year Spread

3.0                                                           1.2

2.5                                                           1.1

2.0                                                           1.0

1.5                                                           0.9

1.0                                                           0.8

0.5                                                           0.7

0.0      6/4/11   6/4/12                     6/4/13   6/4/14       0.6
 6/4/10          AU-US Spread                 AUDUSD          6/4/15

FIGURE 31.1 AUDUSD vs. 10-Year Yield Spread
                                           against the interest rate differential between Australia and the United States between
                                           2010 and 2015. There is clearly a positive correlation between the 10-year yield
                                           spread and the currency. Between June 2014 and June 2015, for example, the yield
                                           spread dropped from 1.5% to 0.5%, and this coincided with a drop in the AUDUSD
                                           from 95 to 76 cents.

                                           Maintaining the Cash Rate: Open Market Operations

                                           The focus of daily open market operations is to keep the cash rate close to the target,

                                           by managing money market liquidity provided to commercial banks. If the Reserve

                                           Bank wishes to decrease the cash rate, it would increase supply of short-dated

                                           repurchase agreements at a lower interest rate than the prevailing cash rate, which

                                           would in essence decrease the cash rate. If the Reserve Bank wishes to increase

                                           the cash rate, it would decrease supply of short-dated repurchase agreements,

                                           which would increase the cash rate. A repurchase agreement involves a cash taker

                                           (commercial bank) selling securities to a cash provider (RBA), while agreeing to

                                           repurchase the securities of the same type and quantity at a later date. This structure

                                           is similar to a secured loan, whereby the cash taker must pay the cash provider

                                           interest. These repo transactions tend to have very short maturities, ranging from

                                           one day to a few weeks.

250                                           Australia has had a floating exchange rate since 1983, and the Reserve Bank
                                           of Australia may undertake foreign exchange market operations when the market

CURRENCY PROFILE: AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR (AUD)  threatens to become excessively volatile or when the exchange rate is clearly

                                           inconsistent with underlying economic fundamentals. The RBA monitors a trade-

                                           weighted index (TWI), as well as the cross-rate with the U.S. dollar. Intervention

                                           operations are invariably aimed at stabilizing market conditions rather than meeting

                                           exchange rate targets.

                                           Monetary Policy Meetings

                                           The RBA meets every month (except for January), on the first Tuesday of each
                                           month, to discuss potential changes in monetary policy. Following each meeting, the
                                           RBA issues a press release outlining justifications for its monetary policy changes.
                                           If it leaves rates unchanged, no statement is published. The RBA also publishes a
                                           monthly Reserve Bank Bulletin. The May and November issues of the Reserve Bank
                                           Bulletin include the semiannual statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy. The
                                           February, May, August, and November issues contain a Quarterly Report on the
                                           Economy and Financial Markets. It is important to read these bulletins for signals on
                                           potential monetary policy changes.
Important Characteristics of the Australian Dollar                                     CURRENCY PROFILE: AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR (AUD)

 Commodity linked currency. Historically, the Australian dollar has had a very strongly
  correlation (approximately 80%) with commodity prices and, more specifically,
  gold and iron ore prices. The correlation stems from the fact that Australia is
  the world's second largest gold producer and the world's largest producer of
  iron ore. Therefore, the price of iron ore and gold is extremely important to
  Australia's economy. However, unless there is a sharp movement in gold or
  iron ore prices, it generally takes time for the AUDUSD to adjust to changes in
  the price of commodities. Generally speaking, if commodity prices are strong,
  inflationary fears start to appear, and the RBA would be inclined to raise rates to
  curb inflation. However, this is a sensitive topic, as gold prices tend to increase
  in times of global economic or political uncertainty. If the RBA increases rates
  during those conditions, it leaves Australia more vulnerable to spillover effects.

 Carry trade effects. Australia has one of highest interest rates among the developed
  countries. With a fairly liquid currency, the Australian dollar is one of the most
  popular currencies to use for carry trades. A carry trade involves buying or
  lending a currency with a high interest rate and selling or borrowing a currency
  with a low interest rate. The popularity of the carry trade has contributed to the
  57% rise of the Australian dollar against the U.S. dollar between 2001 and 2005.
  While the carry trade suffered greatly in 2008, it came back strongly between 251
  2009 and 2011. During this time, many foreign investors were looking for high
  yield when equity investments offered minimal returns. However, carry trades
  only last as long as the actual yield advantage remains. If global central banks
  increase their interest rates and the positive interest rate differential between
  Australia and other countries narrow, the AUDUSD could suffer from an exodus
  of carry traders.

 Drought effects. Since the majority of Australia's exports are commodities, the
  country's GDP is highly sensitive to severe weather conditions that may damage
  the country's farming activities. For example, 2002 was a particularly difficult
  year for Australia, because the country was experiencing a severe drought. The
  drought took an extreme toll on Australia's farming activities, with dry conditions
  hampering the economy throughout the twenty-first century. This is important
  because agriculture accounts for 3% of the country's GDP. The RBA estimates
  that the ``decline in farm production could directly reduce GDP growth by
  around 1 percentage point.'' Aside from exporting activities, a drought also has
  indirect effects on other aspects of Australia's economy. Industries that supply and
  service agriculture, such as the wholesale and transport sectors, as well as retail
                                             operations in rural farming areas, may also be negatively affected by a drought.
                                             However, it is also important to note that the Australian economy has a history
                                             of recovering strongly after a drought. The 1982Ł1983 drought first subtracted
                                             then subsequently added around 1% to 1 12% to GDP growth. The 1991Ł1995
                                             drought reduced GDP by around 12 to 34 percentage points in 1991Ł1992 and
                                             1994Ł1995, but the recovery boosted GDP by 34 percentage points.

                                            Interest rate differentials. Interest rate differentials between the cash rates of Australia
                                             and the short-term interest rate yields of other industrialized countries should
                                             also be closely watched by Australian dollar traders. These differentials can be
                                             good indicators of potential money flows as they indicate how much premium
                                             yield Australian dollar short-term fixed-income assets are offering over foreign
                                             short-term fixed-income assets, or vice versa. This differential provides traders
                                             with indications of potential currency movements, as investors are always looking
                                             for assets with the highest yields. This is particularly important to carry traders
                                             who enter and exit their positions based on the positive interest rate differentials
                                             between global fixed-income assets.

                                            Important Economic Indicators for Australia

252                                        GDP

CURRENCY PROFILE: AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR (AUD)  GDP is a measure of the total production and consumption of goods and services

                                           in Australia. GDP is measured by adding expenditures by households, businesses,

                                           government, and net foreign purchases. The GDP price deflator is used to convert

                                           output measured at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. The data are used

                                           to gauge where in the business cycle Australia finds itself. Fast growth often is

                                           perceived as inflationary, while low (or negative) growth generally coincides with a

                                           weak growth period.

                                           CPI

                                           The Consumer Price Index (CPI) measures quarterly changes in the price of a basket
                                           of goods and services, which account for a high proportion of expenditure by the
                                           CPI population group (i.e., metropolitan households). This basket covers a wide
                                           range of goods and services, including food, housing, education, transportation, and
                                           health. This is an important indicator to watch, as it is a key input for monetary
                                           policy decisions.

                                           Balance of Goods and Services

                                           This number is a monthly measure of Australia's international trade in goods and
                                           services on a balance of payments basis. General merchandise imports and exports
                                  253

FIGURE 31.2 AUDUSD 10-Year Chart  CURRENCY PROFILE: AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR (AUD)
Source: eSignal
                                           are derived mainly from international trade statistics, which are based on Australian
                                           Customs Service records. The current account is the balance of trade plus services.

                                           Private Consumption

                                           This is a national accounts measure that reflects current expenditure by households
                                           and producers of private nonprofit services to households. It includes purchases of
                                           durable as well as nondurable goods. However, it excludes expenditure by persons
                                           on the purchase of dwellings and expenditure of a capital nature by unincorporated
                                           enterprises. This number is important to watch, as private consumption or consumer
                                           consumption is the foundation for resilience in the Australian economy.

                                           Producer Price Index

                                           The Producer Price Index (PPI) is a family of indexes that measures average

                                           changes in selling prices received by domestic producers for their output. The PPI

                                           tracks changes in prices for nearly every goods-producing industry in the domestic

                                           economy, including agriculture, electricity and natural gas, forestry, fisheries,

                                           manufacturing, and mining. Foreign exchange markets tend to focus on seasonally

                                           adjusted finished goods PPI and how the index has reacted on an m/m, q/q, h/h

                                           and y/y basis. Australia's PPI data are released on a quarterly basis.

254                                        Figure 31.2 illustrates the 10 year performance of AUDUSD.

CURRENCY PROFILE: AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR (AUD)
                                                                               CHAPTER 32

   Currency Profile:
   New Zealand Dollar
   (NZD)

                                                                                                                255

 Broad Economic Overview

               New Zealand is a very small economy with GDP valued at approximately
               US$183 billion in 2013. In fact, there are less people living in New Zealand
               than in New York City. It was once one of the most regulated countries within
               the OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development), but over
               the past two decades the country has been moving toward a more open, modern,
               and stable economy. With the passing of the Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1994, the
               country is shifting from an agricultural farming community to one that seeks to
               become a leading knowledge-based economy with high skills, high employment,
               and high value-added production. This act sets legal standards that hold the govern-
               ment formally responsible to the public for its fiscal performance. It also sets the
               framework for the country's macroeconomic policies. The following are the five
               principles outlined under the Fiscal Responsibility Act:
               1. Debt must be reduced to ``prudent'' levels; by achieving surpluses on the

                   operating budget every year until such a level is reached.
               2. Debt must be reduced to ``prudent'' levels; and the government must ensure

                   that expenditure is lower than revenue.
                                            3. Sufficient levels of Crown net worth must be achieved and maintained to guard
                                                against adverse future events.

                                            4. Reasonable taxation policies must be followed.
                                            5. Fiscal risks facing the government must be prudently managed.

                                               New Zealand also has highly developed manufacturing and services sectors,
                                            with the agricultural industry driving the bulk of the country's exports. The
                                            economy is strongly trade-oriented, with exports of goods and services representing
                                            approximately one third of GDP. Due to the small size of the economy and its
                                            significant trade activities, New Zealand is highly sensitive to global performance,
                                            especially of its key Asian trading partners, Australia, China, United States, and Japan.
                                            Together, Australia, China, and Japan represent 42% of New Zealand's trading
                                            activity. It is also extremely sensitive to exchange rate fluctuations, particularly
                                            against the Australian dollar. The following lists are a breakdown of the New
                                            Zealand's most important trading partners:

                                            Leading Export Markets

                                            1. Australia

                                            2. China

                                            3. European Union

                                            4. United States

256                                         5. Japan

CURRENCY PROFILE: NEW ZEALAND DOLLAR (NZD)  Leading Import Sources

                                            1. European Union
                                            2. China
                                            3. Australia
                                            4. United States
                                            5. Japan

                                             Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers-- Reserve
                                               Bank of New Zealand

                                                           Monetary policy in New Zealand is determined by the Reserve Bank (RBNZ).
                                                           The Monetary Policy Committee is an internal committee of bank executives who
                                                           review monetary policy on a weekly basis. Meetings to decide on changes to
                                                           monetary policy occur eight times a year, or approximately every six weeks. Unlike
                                                           most other central banks, the decision for rate changes rests ultimately on the bank's
                                                           governor. The current policy target agreements set by the minister and the governor
                                                           focus on maintaining policy stability and avoiding unnecessary instability in output,
                                                           interest rates, and the exchange rate. Price stability refers to maintaining the annual
CPI inflation at 1.5%. If the RBNZ does not meet this target, the government has     CURRENCY PROFILE: NEW ZEALAND DOLLAR (NZD)
the ability to dismiss the governor of the RBNZ. This is rarely done, but this serves
as a strong incentive for the RBNZ to meets its inflation target. The most common
tools used by the RBNZ to implement monetary policy changes are the following.

Official Cash Rate (OCR)

The Official Cash Rate is the rate set by the RBNZ to implement monetary policy.
The Bank lends overnight cash at 25 basis points above the OCR rate and receives
deposits or pays interest at 25 basis points below this rate. By controlling the cost
of liquidity for commercial banks, the RBNZ can influence the interest rates offered
to individuals and corporations. This effectively creates a 50 basis point corridor
that bounds the interbank overnight rate. The idea is then that banks offering funds
above the upper bound will attract few takers, because funds can be borrowed for
a lower cost from the RBNZ. Also, banks offering rates below the lower bound
will also attract few takers, because they are offering lower yields than the RBNZ.
The official cash rate is reviewed and manipulated with the goal of maintaining
economic stability.

Objectives for Fiscal Policy

Open market operations on the other hand are used to meet the cash target. The 257
cash target is the targeted amount of reserves held by registered banks. The RBNZ
prepares forecasts of daily fluctuations on the cash target and will then use these
forecasts to determine the amount of funds to inject or withdraw in order to meet
the cash target. The following government objectives provide a guideline for fiscal
and monetary policy measures:

 Expenses: Expenses will average around 35% of GDP over the horizon used to
  calculate contributions toward future New Zealand Superannuation (NZS) costs.
  During the buildup of assets to meet future NZS costs, expenses plus contributions
  will be around 35% of GDP. In the longer term, expenses less withdrawals to
  meet NZS costs will be around 35% of GDP.

 Revenue: Raise sufficient revenue to meet the operating balance objective. A
  robust, broad-based tax system that raises revenue in a fair and efficient way.

 Operating balance: Operating surplus on average over the economic cycle sufficient
  to meet the requirements for contributions toward future NZS costs and ensure
  consistency with the debt objective.

 Debt: Gross debt below 30% of GDP on average over the economic cycle. Net
  debt, which excludes the assets to meet future NZS costs, below 20% of GDP on
  average over the economic cycle.
                                             Net worth: Increase net worth consistent with the operating balance objective.
                                              This will be achieved through a buildup of assets to meet future NZS costs.

                                            Source: New Zealand Treasury

          Important Characteristics of the New ZealandCURRENCY PROFILE: NEW ZEALAND DOLLAR (NZD)
             Dollar

                        Strong Correlation with AUD--Competition with Australia

                          Australia is New Zealand's largest trading partner. This coupled with their geographic
                          proximity and New Zealand's high dependence on trade, creates strong ties between
                          the economies of the two countries. When the Australian economy is healthy and
                          Australian corporations increase their importing activities, New Zealand will be one
                          of the first to benefit. When it is weak, New Zealand suffers but in recent years
                          its sensitivity has diminished because of the country's growing trade with China
                          and other nations. Nonetheless, 22% of trade is still conducted with Australia,
                          and this explains why there is a positive correlation between the two currencies.
                          Figure 32.1 shows how closely AUDUSD and NZDUSD have moved between 2005
                          and 2015.

258
                        Commodity-Linked Currency

                          New Zealand is an export driven economy with commodities representing over
                          40% of the country's exports, and as a result the New Zealand dollar has a strong
                          correlation with commodity prices, particularly dairy. Fonterra is one of the world's

                                                                                     AUDUSD vs. NZDUSD
                                            1.2

                                            1.1

                                              1

                                            0.9
                                            0.8
                                            0.7
                                            0.6
                                            0.5

                                            0.4      6/30/06  6/30/07  6/30/08  6/30/09 6/30/10  6/30/11 6/30/12  6/30/13  6/30/14
                                            6/30/05                               AUDUSD           NZDUSD

                                            FIGURE 32.1 AUDUSD versus NZDUSD
leading dairy producer and also largest company in New Zealand. Twice a month            CURRENCY PROFILE: NEW ZEALAND DOLLAR (NZD)
the Global Dairy Trade will conduct an auction and if prices rise, it will be positive
for the New Zealand dollar. If prices fall, it will be negative for the currency
because it can mean reduced payout and profit for dairy producers. The correlation
between Australian and New Zealand dollars also contributes to the NZD's status as a
``commodity linked'' currency. Therefore, the New Zealand dollar's correlation with
commodity prices is not only limited to its own trade activities. Therefore, as com-
modity prices increase, the Australian economy benefits, translating into increased
activity in all aspects of the country's operations, including trade with New Zealand.

Carry Trades

Of the industrialized countries, New Zealand tends to maintain the highest interest
rate as it needs to offer investors a higher yield to compensate for the risk of
investing in a small economy. This yield advantage along with its secure credit rating
has made the New Zealand dollar one of the most popular currencies to purchase
for carry trades. A carry trade involves buying or lending a currency with a high
interest rate and selling or borrowing a currency with a low interest rate. The
popularity of the carry trade has contributed to the rise of the New Zealand dollar in
an environment where many global investors are looking for opportunities to earn
high yield. However, this also makes the New Zealand dollar particularly sensitive
to changes in interest rates. That is, when the United States begins increasing their 259
interest rates, while New Zealand stays on hold or reduces their interest rates, the
carry advantage of the New Zealand dollar would narrow. In such situations, the
New Zealand dollar could come under pressure as speculators reverse their carry
trade positions.

Interest Rate Differentials

Interest rate differentials between the cash rates of New Zealand and the short
term interest rate yields of other industrialized countries are closely watched by
professional NZD traders. These differentials can be good indicators of potential
money flows as they indicate how much premium yield NZD short-term fixed-
income assets are offering over foreign short-term fixed income assets, or vice versa.
This differential provides traders with indications of potential currency movements,
as investors are always looking for assets with the highest yields. This is particularly
important to carry traders who enter and exit their positions based on the positive
interest rate differentials between global fixed-income assets.

Population Migration

As mentioned earlier, New Zealand has a very small population, less than half of
New York City. Therefore, changes in migration can have significant effects on the
                                            economy. Between 2013 and 2014, the population of New Zealand increased by
                                            78,800 people, which was the largest net migration in at least 90 years. Between
                                            2011 and 2012, for example, the population only grew by 26,400 people. Although
                                            these absolute numbers appear small, it is fairly significant for New Zealand because
                                            of the size of the population. In fact, this strong population migration into New
                                            Zealand has contributed significantly to the performance of the economy, because
                                            as the population increases, the demand for household goods increases, leading to
                                            an increase in overall consumer consumption.

                                            Drought Effects

                                            Since the bulk of New Zealand's exports are commodities, the country's GDP is
                                            highly sensitive to severe weather conditions that may damage the country's farming
                                            activities. In 2013, droughts cost the country over $1.3 billion. In addition, droughts
                                            are also very frequent in Australia, New Zealand's largest trading partner, and when
                                            they occur it can have a negative impact on the New Zealand economy.

                                             Important Economic Indicators for New Zealand

                                            New Zealand does not release economic indicators often; however, when they do,

260                                         the following items are the most important:

CURRENCY PROFILE: NEW ZEALAND DOLLAR (NZD)  Gross Domestic Product

                                            GDP is a quarterly measure of the total production and consumption of goods and
                                            services in New Zealand. GDP is measured by adding expenditures by households,
                                            businesses, government, and net foreign purchases. The GDP price deflator is used
                                            to convert output measured at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. This data are
                                            used to gauge where in the business cycle New Zealand finds itself. Fast growth often
                                            is perceived inflationary, while low (or negative) growth indicates a recessionary or
                                            weak growth period.

                                            Consumer Price Index

                                            The Consumer Price Index (CPI) measures quarterly changes in the price of a
                                            ``basket'' of goods and services that account for a high proportion of expenditure by
                                            the CPI population group (i.e., metropolitan households). This basket covers a wide
                                            range of goods and services, including food, housing, education, transportation,
                                            and health. This is an important indicator to watch, as monetary policy changes are
                                            highly influenced by this index as it is a measure of inflation.
                                  261

FIGURE 32.2 NZDUSD 10-Year Chart  CURRENCY PROFILE: NEW ZEALAND DOLLAR (NZD)
Source: eSignal
                                            Balance of Goods and Services

                                            New Zealand's Balance of Payments statements are records of the value of New
                                            Zealand's transactions in goods, services, income, and transfers with the rest of the
                                            world, and the changes in New Zealand's financial claims on (assets), and liabilities
                                            to, the rest of the world. New Zealand's International Investment Position statement
                                            shows, at a particular point in time, the stock of a country's international financial
                                            assets and international financial liabilities.

                                            Retail Sales Ex Inflation

                                            Credit card spending numbers are released for New Zealand on a monthly basis but
                                            the retail sales data is quarterly on an ex inflation basis. This measure tracks the
                                            resale of new and used goods to the public for personal or household consumption.
                                            It is also an important input into GDP.

                                            Producer Price Index

                                            The Producer Price Index (PPI) is a family of indexes that measures average changes

                                            in selling prices received by domestic producers for their output. The PPI tracks

                                            changes in prices for nearly every goods producing industry in the domestic economy,

262                                         including agriculture, electricity and natural gas, forestry, fisheries, manufacturing,
                                            and mining. Foreign exchange markets tend to focus on seasonally adjusted finished

CURRENCY PROFILE: NEW ZEALAND DOLLAR (NZD)  goods PPI and how the index has reacted on a m/m, q/q, h/h, and y/y basis. New

                                            Zealand's PPI data is released on a quarterly basis.

                                            Figure 32.2 illustrates the 10-year performance of NZDUSD.
                                                                               CHAPTER 33

   Currency Profile:
   Canadian Dollar
   (CAD)

                                                                                                                263

 Broad Economic Performance

               Canada is the world's eleventh largest country with GDP valued at US$1.8 trillion as
               of 2014. As a resource-based economy, the country's early economic development
               hinged on the development, exploitation, and exports of natural resources. It is
               now the world's fifth largest producer of oil and gold. However, in actuality,
               nearly two-thirds of the country's GDP comes from the service sector, which also
               employs three out of four Canadians. The strength in the service sector is partly
               attributed to the trend by businesses to subcontract a large portion of their services.
               This may include a manufacturing company subcontracting delivery services to a
               transportation company. Despite this, manufacturing and resources are still very
               important for the Canadian economy, as it represents over 25% of the country's
               exports and is a primary source of income for a number of provinces.

                  The Canadian economy started to advance with the depreciation of its currency
               against the U.S. dollar and the Free Trade Agreement that came into effect in January
               1989. This agreement eliminated almost all trade tariffs between the United States
               and Canada. As a result, Canada now exports over 85% of its goods to the United
               States. Further negotiations to incorporate Mexico created the North American Free
               Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which took effect on January 1994. This more advanced
                                         treaty eliminated most tariffs on trading between all three countries. Canada's close
                                         trade relationship with the United States makes it particularly sensitive to the health
                                         of the U.S. economy. If the U.S. economy sputters, demand for Canadian exports
                                         would suffer. The same is true for the opposite scenario; if U.S. economic growth
                                         is robust, Canadian exports will benefit. In the past decade, trade with China has
                                         also increased significantly, rising in the ranks from the fifth to the second most
                                         important trade partner for Canada. The following is a breakdown of Canada's key
                                         export and import markets:

                                         Leading Export Markets
                                         1. United States
                                         2. China
                                         3. United Kingdom
                                         4. Japan
                                         5. Mexico

                                         Leading Import Sources

                                         1. United States

                                         2. China

                                         3. Japan

264                                      4. Mexico

                                         5. United Kingdom

CURRENCY PROFILE: CANADIAN DOLLAR (CAD)   Monetary and Fiscal Policy

                                                        The Governing Council of the Bank of Canada is the board that is responsible for
                                                        setting Canadian monetary policy. This council consists of seven members: the
                                                        governor and six deputy governors. The Bank of Canada meets approximately eight
                                                        times per year to discuss changes in monetary policy. They also release a monthly
                                                        monetary policy update every quarter, but the rate decision itself is the big market
                                                        mover for the currency.

                                                      Central Bank Goals

                                                        The Bank of Canada's primary focus is on maintaining the ``integrity and value of
                                                        the currency,'' and this involves ensuring price stability. Price stability is maintained
                                                        by adhering to an inflation target currently set by the Department of Finance at
                                                        1% to 3%. The Bank believes that high inflation can damage the functioning of the
                                                        economy. In their opinion, low inflation on the other hand equates to price stability,
                                                        which can help to foster sustainable long-term economic growth. The BoC controls
                                                        inflation through short-term interest rates. If inflation is above the target, the Bank
                                                        will apply tighter monetary conditions. If it is below the target, the Bank will loosen
monetary policy. Overall, the central bank has done a pretty good job of keeping
the inflation target within the band since 1998.

   The Bank measures monetary conditions using its Monetary Conditions Index,
which is a weighted sum of changes in the 90-day commercial paper rate and G-10
trade-weighted exchange rates. The weight of the interest rate versus the exchange
rate is 3 to 1, which is the affect of a change in interest rates on the exchange rate
based on historical studies. This means that a 1% increase in short-term interest
rates is the same as a 3% appreciation of the trade-weighted exchange rate. To
change monetary policy, the BoC manipulates the Bank Rate, which can in turn
affect the exchange rate. If the currency appreciates to undesirable levels, the BoC
can decrease interest rates to offset the rise. If it depreciates, the BoC can raise rates.
However, interest rate changes are not used for the purposes of manipulating the
exchange rate. Instead, they are used to control inflation but an excessively strong
currency and lower inflationary pressures can accelerate the changes. The following
are the most commonly used tools by the BoC to implement monetary policy.

Bank Rate

The Bank Rate is the main rate used to control inflation. This is the rate of interest

that the Bank of Canada charges to commercial banks. Changes to this rate will affect

other interest rates, including mortgage rates and prime rates charged by commercial

banks. Therefore, changes to this rate will filter into the overall economy.                 265

Open Market Operations                                                                       CURRENCY PROFILE: CANADIAN DOLLAR (CAD)

The Large Value Transfer System (LVTS) is the framework for the Bank of Canada's
implementation of monetary policy. It is through this framework that Canada's
commercial banks borrow and lend overnight money to each other in order to fund
their daily transactions. The LVTS is an electronic platform through which these
financial institutions conduct large transactions. The interest rate charged on these
overnight loans is called the overnight rate or bank rate. The BoC can manipulate the
overnight rate by offering to lend at rates lower or higher than the current market
rate if the overnight lending rate is trading above or below the target banks.

   On a regular basis, the bank releases a number of publications that are important to
follow. This includes a biannual Monetary Policy Report that contains an assessment of
the current economic environment and implications for inflation and a quarterly Bank
of Canada Review that includes economic commentary, featured articles, speeches by
members of the Governing Council, and important announcements.

Important Characteristics of the Canadian Dollar

 Commodity linked currency. As the world's fifth largest producer of oil and gold,
  Canada's economy is highly dependent on commodities. This creates a strong
  positive correlation between the Canadian dollar and oil prices. Generally
                                         speaking, when oil prices rise, it benefits domestic producers and increases their
                                         income from exports. However at the same time, strong commodity prices can
                                         hurt growth abroad; so while rising oil prices are initially positive for Canada,
                                         the negative impact on global growth could lead to a decline in demand over the
                                         medium term. On the flip side, falling oil prices are negative for the Canadian
                                         dollar; but if prices remain low and global growth benefits, it can eventually
                                         neutralize the negative impact.

                                          Strong correlation with the United States. Since the 1980s, Canada has been running
                                           merchandise trade surpluses with the United States and now approximately 77%
                                           of Canadian exports are bound for the Untied States. This heavy reliance on U.S.,
                                           demand makes Canada extremely sensitive to changes in the U.S. economy. As the
                                           U.S. economy accelerates, trade increases with Canadian companies, lifting overall
                                           economic activity. However, as the U.S. economy slows, the Canadian economy
                                           will be hurt significantly as U.S. companies reduce their importing activities.

                                          Mergers and acquisitions. Due to the proximity of the United States and Canada,

                                         cross-border mergers and acquisitions are very common, as companies worldwide

                                         strive for globalization. These mergers and acquisitions lead to money flowing

                                         between the two countries, which ultimately impacts the currencies. In 2001,

                                         the significant U.S. acquisition of Canadian energy companies infused US$25

266                                      billion into Canada. This led to a strong rally in USDCAD, as the U.S. companies

                                         needed to sell USD and buy CAD to pay for their acquisitions. Any similar type

CURRENCY PROFILE: CANADIAN DOLLAR (CAD)  of M&A flow in the future will also have a significant but short-term impact on

                                         the Canadian dollar.

                                          Interest rate differentials. Interest rate differentials between the cash rates of
                                           Canada and the short-term interest rate yields of other industrialized countries
                                           are closely watched by professional Canadian dollar traders. These differentials
                                           can be good indicators of potential money flows as they indicate how much
                                           premium yield Canadian short-term fixed-income assets are offering over foreign
                                           short-term fixed-income assets, and vice versa. This differential provides traders
                                           with indications of potential currency movements, as investors are always looking
                                           for assets with the highest yields. This is particularly important to carry traders
                                           who enter and exit their positions based on the positive interest rate differentials
                                           between global fixed-income assets.

                                          Carry trades. A carry trade involves buying or lending a currency with a high
                                           interest rate and selling or borrowing a currency with a low interest rate. When
                                           Canada has a higher interest rate than the United States, the short USDCAD carry
                                           trade becomes more attractive; but if the United States embarks on a tightening
                                           campaign or Canada lowers rates, the positive interest rate differential between
                                           the Canadian dollar and other currencies would narrow. In such situations, the
                                           Canadian dollar could come under pressure if the speculators begin to exit out of
                                           their carry trades.
 Important Economic Indicators for Canada                                                              CURRENCY PROFILE: CANADIAN DOLLAR (CAD)

               Canadian economic reports can have a significant impact on the currency. Here are
               a handful of the most important releases.

             Canadian Employment

               Every month, Canada releases its labor market report and this report provides more
               details than that of the United States. Job growth is expressed as net job growth and
               then split into full- and part-time hirers. Generally speaking, the market prefers that
               the bulk of job growth is full time, because it represents real long-term employment
               and not short-term hires that can be laid off at any time. The unemployment rate is
               also released, and the number of unemployed persons is expressed as a percentage
               of the labor force.

             Consumer Price Index (CPI)

               The monthly consumer price report measures the average rate of increase in prices.
               When economists speak of inflation as an economic problem, they generally mean
               a persistent increase in the general price level over a period of time, resulting in a
               decline in a currency's purchasing power. Inflation is often measured as a percentage
               increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). Canada's inflation policy, as set out 267
               by the federal government and the Bank of Canada, aims to keep inflation within
               a target range of 1% to 3%. If the rate of inflation is 10% a year, $100 worth of
               purchases last year will, on average, cost $110 this year. At the same inflation rate,
               those purchases will cost $121 next year, and so on.

             Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

               The gross domestic product measures the total value of all goods and services
               produced within Canada during a given year. It is a measure of the income generated
               by production within Canada. GDP is also referred to as economic output. To
               avoid counting the same output more than once, GDP includes only final goods
               and services--not those that are used to make another product. For example, GDP
               would not include the wheat used to make bread, but would include the bread itself.

             Trade Balance

               The balance of trade is a statement of a country's trade in goods (merchandise) and
               services. It covers trade in products such as manufactured goods, raw materials, and
               agricultural goods, as well as travel and transportation. The balance of trade is the
               difference between the value of the goods and services that a country exports and
               the value of the goods and services that it imports. If a country's exports exceed its
               imports, it has a trade surplus and the trade balance is said to be positive. If imports
                                         FIGURE 33.1 USDCAD 10-Year Chart
                                         Source: eSignal

                                         exceed exports, the country has a trade deficit, and its trade balance is said to be
                                         negative.

268                                      Retail Sales

CURRENCY PROFILE: CANADIAN DOLLAR (CAD)  Retail sales is a monthly national accounts measure that calculates current expenditure
                                         by households and producers of private nonprofit services to households. It includes
                                         purchases of durable as well as nondurable goods. However, it excludes expenditure
                                         by persons on the purchase of dwellings and expenditure of a capital nature by
                                         unincorporated enterprises. Stronger consumer spending is positive for Canada's
                                         economy and, in turn, the Canadian dollar, whereas weaker consumer spending is
                                         negative for Canada's economy and currency.

                                         Producer Price Index

                                         The Producer Price Index (PPI) is a family of indexes that measures average changes
                                         in selling prices received by domestic producers for their output. The PPI tracks
                                         changes in prices for nearly every goods producing industry in the domestic economy,
                                         including agriculture, electricity and natural gas, forestry, fisheries, manufacturing,
                                         and mining. Foreign exchange markets tend to focus on seasonally adjusted finished
                                         goods PPI and how the index has reacted on a monthly, quarterly, and annual basis.

                                            Figure 33.1 illustrates the 10-year performance of USDCAD
INDEX

Note: Page references followed by ``f'' indicate an illustrated figure.

A                                          New Zealand Dollar, correlation, 260

Abenomics, 240                             open market operations, 252
Anti-dollar, 21, 178
Asian financial crisis (1997Ł1998), 25Ł27  Average Directional Index (ADX), 76, 81, 83,    269
                                                    143Ł144
   price action, 26f
   USDJPY Asian crisis price action, 27f   B
Asset market model/theory, 39, 43, 48Ł50
AUDCHF carry trade, examples, 156f,        Balance of goods and services, 254, 256, 264
                                           Balance of payments (BOP), 39, 41, 43
         158f
AUDNZD, bond spread (relationship), 184f      Japan, 246
AUDUSD                                        Switzerland, 240
                                           Bank of Canada, 266Ł268
   gold, relationship, 178f                   Bank of Canada Review, 267Ł268
   NZDUSD, contrast, 260f                     Large Value Transfer System (LVTS), 267Ł268
   10-year chart, 255f                        Monetary Conditions Index, 267
   10-year yield spread, contrast, 251f       Monetary Policy Report, 267
Australia, 250Ł256                         Bank of England (BoE), 23, 225Ł229
   New Zealand, competition, 260              GBPUSD UK BoE QE, 172f
Australian Dollar (AUD), 251Ł254              quantitative easing, usage, 169, 170
   AUDUSD, 10-year yield spread               Soros, impact, 22Ł24
                                           Bank of Japan (BoJ)
         (contrast), 251f                     intervention practices, 196, 244Ł245
   carry trade effects, 253                   invisible floor, creation, 197
   cash rate, 251Ł252                         money supply, increase, 46
   commodity-linked currency, 253             quantitative easing, usage, 169, 175
   drought effects, 253Ł254                   zero interest rate policy (ZIRP), 243
   interest rate differentials, 254        Bank repo rate (British Pound), 226
   monetary policy meetings, 252
       Basket of goods and services (PPP), 44           Channels, 139Ł142

       Bear markets, 7, 12Ł13                           EURGBP 15-minute chart, 141f

       Black Wednesday, 3, 23                           EURUSD 15-minute chart, 141f

       Bloomberg Professional Terminal information, 83  USDCAD 15-minute chart, 140f

       Bollinger Bands, 82, 85, 101, 113                CHFJPY charts, 96f, 97f, 98f

       Double Bollinger Bands, usage, 101, 103Ł110 Coincident indicator, 183Ł185

       Bond markets, 42                                 COMEX trading, 12

       Bond spreads, 181Ł185                            Commitment of Traders Report (Commodity and

       currency, relationships, 183f, 184f              Futures Commission), 187

       Bottoms (selection), double Bollinger Bands      Commodity currencies, 177

          (usage), 103Ł110                              Commodity-linked currency, 253, 260Ł261, 268

       Boucher, Mark, 91                                Commodity prices, direction (following), 151

       Breakouts, 129, 192, 194                         Commodity prices, leading indicator function,

       Bretton Woods (1944), 17Ł19                      177Ł180

       British Pound (GBP), 226Ł231                     AUDUSD, gold (relationship), 178f

       energy prices, positive correlation, 228         Consumer Confidence Survey (US), 210

       Eurosterling futures, interest rate movement     Consumer Price Index (CPI)

          indicators, 227Ł228                           Australian Dollar, 254

       gilts, foreign bonds (interest rate              British Pound, 231

          differentials), 227                           Canadian Dollar, 269

       Retail Price Index (RPI) (RPIX) (RPI-X),         New Zealand Dollar, 262

          226, 231                                      Swiss Franc, 240

       retail sales, relationship, 229, 231             US Dollar, 209

270       trading activity, 118                         Corporate profitability, 2
       Bull markets, profitability, 7, 12Ł13            Correlations, 67Ł71, 70f

INDEX  Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), GDP           Cross-currency pairs, trading, 16

          measures,210Ł211                              Currency

                                                        checklists, 77f

       C                                                correlations, defining/usage, 67
                                                        crisis (Asian financial crisis), 26Ł27

       Canada, 266Ł271                                  deals, USD involvement, 206

       Canadian Dollar (CAD)                            forecasting, 39Ł51

       carry trades, relationship, 269                  levels, balance of payments (impact), 43

       characteristics, 268Ł269                         market, 31, 80Ł81

       commodity-linked currency, 268                   positive/negative correlations,

       interest rate differentials, 268                 meaning/usage, 68Ł71

       mergers/acquisitions, relationship, 268          strong currency/weak currency pairing, 149

       United States, correlation, 268                  Currency pairs, 74Ł77

       USDCAD 10-year chart, 270f                       Asian session, 54Ł55, 55f

       Capital appreciation, earning, 153               European Asian overlap, 58f, 59

       Capital flows, 33Ł35, 41Ł43                      European sessions, 56Ł57, 57f

       Carry trades, 155Ł160                            identification, 124

       AUDCHF carry trade, examples, 156f, 158f         ranges, 54f

       Canadian Dollar, relationship, 269               trading times, determination, 53Ł59

       effects, 237, 243, 253                           trends, following, 182Ł183

       New Zealand Dollar, 261                          US-Europe overlap, 58Ł59, 58f

       profitability, 158Ł159, 159f                     US session, 55Ł56, 56f

       Swiss Franc, effects, 237                        Currency profiles, 203

       Central bank, fading, 196                        Australian Dollar (AUD), 249Ł256

       Centralized markets, 14Ł15, 14f                  British Pound (GBP), 223Ł231
   Canadian Dollar (CAD), 265Ł271                  Equities market (equity markets), 41Ł42

   Euro (EUR), 213Ł222                             characteristics, 5

   Japanese Yen (JPY), 241Ł248                     day trade problems, 7

   New Zealand Dollar (NZD), 257Ł264               FX market, comparison, 4Ł11

   Swiss Franc (CHF), 233Ł239                      next best order system, 8

   US Dollar (USD), 203Ł211                        portfolio flows, 34Ł35

Currency substitution model, 39, 50Ł51             Error rates, reduction, 8, 13Ł14

   flowchart, 51f                                  EURCAD inside day chart, 127f

   limitations, 51                                 EURCHF 1.20 Peg, 199f

   step-by-step process, 50                        EURCHF 10-year chart, 239f

   yen example, 50                                 EURGBP charts, 125f, 141f, 150f

                                                   Euro, 217Ł222

D                                                  adoption, UK arguments, 235
                                                   benefits, 28

Dairy prices, 180                                  introduction, 27Ł30, 206Ł207

Data, usage/impact, 62Ł65                          launch, impact, 29f

DAX Index, EURUSD (relationship), 49f              Swiss futures, foreign interest rate futures

Day trades, FX (impact), 7                         (interest rate differentials), 237

Dealing stations, 16                               UK politicians, impact, 228

Deals, waiting, 117Ł121                            UK tests, 224Ł225

   charts, 120f, 119f                              European Central Bank (ECB), 28, 215Ł218

Decentralized markets, structure, 15f              interventions, 200Ł201

Dollar-driven theory, 49                           quantitative easing, 149, 169, 175

Double Bollinger Bands, usage, 101, 103Ł110        European Currency Unit (ECU), 22                 271
Double zeros, 113Ł116                              European Monetary System (EMS), setup, 22

   charts, 114f, 115f                              European Monetary Union (EMU), 213Ł215           INDEX

   EURUSD 15-minute chart, 114f                    European Sovereign Debt Crisis (2009-2013),

   strategy, 111Ł116                               162, 164, 164f

   trades, 112Ł113                                 European Union (EU), Harmonized Index of

Dow Jones, chart, 34f                              Consumer Prices (HICP), 219

Down rules, absence, 12Ł13                         Eurosterling futures, interest rate movement

Drought effects, 253Ł254, 262                      indicators, 227Ł228

DXY trading, 208                                   Eurosystem, 216

                                                   Eurozone, 175, 200Ł201

E                                                  EURUSD (EUR/USD)
                                                      Bollinger band daily chart, 102f, 104f, 105f

Economic and monetary union (EMU) criteria,        bond spread, relationship, 183f

   215Ł216                                         charts, 37f, 64f, 75f, 114f, 132f, 141f, 152f,

Economic data, importance (FX dealer               164f, 188f, 221f

   ranking), 63f                                   corporate profitability, 2

Economic indicators (United States), 209Ł211       DAX Index, relationship, 49f

Economic surprises, charting, 36, 37f              election trade, 166f

Electronic brokering systems (EBSs), 15            G7 meeting, 167f

Emerging market countries (local currencies),      intervention, 201f

   US Dollar (peg), 207Ł208                        liquidity, 217

Emotional detachment, practice, 88                 perfect order setup, 145f

Employment cost index (ECI), 211                   price, Euro launch (impact), 29f

Energy prices, GBP positive correlation, 228       range, economic releases (impact), 63f

Entry levels, determination (difficulty), 143Ł144  trades, 106f, 107f

Equities, 89, 208Ł209                              trading activity, 217
       EURUSD (EUR/USD) (Continued)                      Gilts, foreign bonds (interest rate differentials),

       Ukraine crisis, 163f                                 227

       Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM), 22Ł23, 216         Global financial crisis (2007Ł2009), subprime,

       Exchange rates, flexibility (increase), 166          164, 165f

       Exit levels, determination (difficulty), 143Ł144  Global inflation, oil price (impact), 179

       Exports, measurement, 35Ł36                       Gold, 19, 178Ł179, 207

                                                            AUDUSD, relationship, 178f

       F                                                    dollar index, contrast, 207f
                                                            Swiss Franc, correlation, 236Ł237
       Fader, 129                                        Gross domestic product (GDP), 63Ł64,
          charts, 131f, 132f
                                                                  210Ł211, 220

       examples, 130, 133                                   Australian Dollar, 254
       strategy rules, 130Ł133                              British Pound, 231
       trades, 130                                          Canadian Dollar, 269, 271

       False breakouts, 124Ł125, 135                        Japanese Yen, 248
       Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), 205            New Zealand Dollar, 262
       Federal Reserve Board (Fed), 205Ł206                 Swiss Franc, 240

          Monetary Policy decisions, importance, 32

          quantitative easing, usage, 169, 170           H
       Fiscal Responsibility Act (New Zealand),

          257Ł258                                        Harmonized Consumer Price Index

       Fixed-income markets, 35, 42                         (HCPI), 215

       Foreign bonds, 208, 227                           Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices

272    Foreign direct investment (FDI), 41                  (HICP), 219

       Foreign exchange (forex) (FX) market, 1Ł2, 4,     High risk aversion, 157Ł158

INDEX     11Ł16                                          Hot money, impact, 51

       examination, 53

       futures/equities, comparison, 4Ł11                I
       historical events, 17

       leading indicator, bond spreads (usage), 181      IFO survey, 219

       quantitative easing, impact, 169                  Implied volatility, decrease, 81Ł82

       trading, 54Ł59, 89, 192Ł194                       Imports, measurement, 35Ł36

       transactions costs, reduction, 6, 12              Index of Industrial Production (US), 211

       Free market capitalism, 18Ł20                     Indicators, 62, 84Ł86, 183Ł185

       Fundamental analysis, 32Ł39                       Individual currency pairs, trading times

       Futures market, 4Ł14, 89                             (determination), 53Ł59

       Futures trade, process, 13                        Industrial production (IP), 231, 240, 246, 248

                                                         Inside days breakout play, 123Ł127

       G                                                    charts, 125f, 126f, 127f
                                                         Insider day trading, examples, 125Ł127

       G7 Dubai meeting (September 2003),                Interbank market, 16

          166Ł167, 167f                                  Intercontinental Exchange (ICE), USD index

       GBPDEM, Soros (impact), 24f                          trading, 208

       GBPUSD charts, 24f, 108f, 109f, 114f, 119f,       Interest rate, 45Ł48

          120f, 172f, 184f, 189f, 193f, 230f                direction, uncertainty, 9, 11

       General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade               importance, 155

          (GATT), formation, 18                             low interest rate currency appreciation,

       German industrial production, indicator, 219Ł220     159Ł160

       German unemployment, indicator, 220                  movements, prediction, 183Ł185
target interest rate range (Swiss National    Large Value Transfer System (LVTS),

Bank), 235                                    267Ł268

Interest rate differentials, 182Ł185          Leading indicator, 183Ł185

Australian Dollar, 254                        Lend Lease Act, 17

British Pound, 227                            Leverage, customization, 6Ł7

Canadian Dollar, 268                          Leveraged carry trade, 153Ł160

New Zealand Dollar, 261                       AUDCHF carry trade, examples, 156f, 158f

US Dollar, 208                                example, 154f

International Monetary Fund (IMF), 18, 27, 204 Limit up rules, absence, 12Ł13

International trade, 211, 214Ł215             Liquidity, market hours (comparison), 12

Intervention, 195                             Long-term volatility, 192

betting, 200Ł201                              Long trades

EURCHF 1.20 Peg, 199f                         channels, 139Ł140

Eurozone, 200Ł201                             deals, waiting, 118

EURUSD intervention, 201f                     double zeros, 112

Japan, 196Ł197                                EUR/USD long trade, 107, 107f, 110

risk, stops (usage), 201                      fader, 130

Switzerland, 197Ł200                          inside days breakout play, 124

USDJPY chart, 196f, 198f, 199f                strategy rules, 103

Intraday trade (range), 84                    20-day breakout trade, 135Ł136

Invisible floor, creation, 197                USDJPY long trade, 109f

Invisible hand, 20                            Low interest rate currency appreciation,

Iraq, U.S. war, 167Ł168                       159Ł160

Iron ore, 180                                 Low risk aversion, 156Ł157                      273

J                                             M                                               INDEX

Japan, 243Ł248                                M3, indicator, 222
   Asian financial crisis (1997Ł1998), 25Ł27  Maastricht Treaty (Treaty on European Union),
   equities, exposure, 2
   intervention, 196Ł197                               28, 215, 216
   leading export markets, 241                Macro event driven trades, 161Ł168
   leading import sources, 242                Manufacturing ISM, 210
   quantitative easing, 175                   Market makers, 14, 111
   Tankan Report, 246                         Market movements (timing), option volatilities

Japanese Yen (JPY), 243Ł245                            (usage), 191
   appreciation/depreciation, 158, 244        Market moving economic data, 61
   USDJPY 10-year chart, 247f                 Market moving indicators, 62
                                              Markets, 12, 38Ł39, 73
K                                             Medium-term breakout trade, 86
                                              Medium-term range trade, 85
Keynes, John Maynard, 17                      Medium-term trend trade, 85
KoF leading indicators (Switzerland), 238     Minimum bid rate (repo rate), 217
                                              Ministry of Finance (MoF) (Japan), 243
L                                             Momentum, consistency, 83Ł84
                                              Monetary model, 45Ł47, 46f
Lagging indicator, 183Ł185                    Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), 225Ł226
Lamont, Norman, 23                            Monetary Policy Reports, 205, 267
                                              Multilateral intervention, effects, 21Ł22
                                              Multiple time frame analysis, 91
       N                                                P

       Negative correlations, meaning/usage, 68Ł71      Parabolic SAR, 88

       New Zealand, 257Ł264                             Perfect market, usage, 8Ł9

       New Zealand Dollar                               Perfect order, 143Ł148

       carry trades, 261                                   setup, examples, 145f, 146f, 147f

       drought effects, 262                             Physical flows, 33Ł34

       interest rate differentials, 261                 Plaza Accord (1985), 20Ł22, 21f

       NZDUSD 10-year chart, 263f                       PMIs, 218Ł219, 229

       population migration, 261Ł262                    Political uncertainty, U.S. presidential election

       Producer Price Index (PPI), 264                         (2004), 165, 166f

       New Zealand Dollar (NZD)                         Portfolio flows, 34Ł35

       AUD, correlation, 260                            Positive correlations, meaning/usage, 68Ł71

       AUDUSD, contrast, 260f                           Preliminary GDP, 220

       characteristics, 260Ł262                         Producer Price Index (PPI)

       commodity-linked currency, 260Ł261                  Australia, 256

       Next best order system, 8, 13                       Canada, 271

       Nikkei (market), 2Ł3                                New Zealand, 264

       Nonfarm payrolls, employment indicator, 31, 209     United States, 210

       Nonmanufacturing ISM, 210                        Production index (industrial production),

       Nonseasonally (NSA) adjusted terms, 220                 Switzerland, 240

       North American Free Trade Agreement              Purchasing power parity (PPP), 39, 43Ł45

          (NAFTA), 265Ł266                                 Big Mac Index, 44

       NZDUSD charts, 126f, 150f, 263f                     Organization of Economic Cooperation and

274                                                            Development (OECD) PPP, 44Ł45

INDEX  O                                                   usage, limitations, 45
                                                        Put-call parity, 187

       Official Cash Rate (OCR) (New Zealand), 259

       Oil, 179Ł180                                     Q

       NZDCAD daily chart, 150f

          USDCAD, relationship, 180f                    Quantitative easing (QE), 169Ł170
       Online trading, impact, 8                           charts/examples, 150f, 171f, 172f, 173f, 174f
       Open market operations, 205                         ECB introduction, 149
                                                           Eurozone quantitative easing, 175
          Australian Dollar, 252                           Japan quantitative easing, 175
          British Pound, 226
          Euro, 216

       Japanese Yen, 243Ł244                            R
       Swiss Franc, 235Ł236

       Optimization, 113, 124Ł125, 133                  Range

       Options (risk reversals), 84                        determination, double Bollinger Bands

       Option volatilities, 191Ł194                            (usage), 107

       GBPUSD volatility chart, 193f                       environment, profiling, 81Ł83

       technique, 192, 194                                 trading rules, 81f

       tracking, 194                                    Range bound markets, 38Ł39, 80

       USDJPY volatility chart, 193f                    Real interest rate differential model, 39,

       Organization of Economic Cooperation and                47Ł48, 47f

          Development (OECD), 44Ł45, 257                Relative Strength Index (RSI), usage, 92

       Over-the-counter (OTC) market, 1                 Renminbi (RMB), 3Ł4, 34, 206Ł207
Repo rate (minimum bid rate), 217         Strong currency/weak currency pairing, 149,

Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), 250Ł252          150, 151f

Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ), 258Ł260 Subprime global financial crisis

   currency intervention, 197                     (2007Ł2009), 164

Retail Price Index (RPI) (RPIX) (RPI-X), British Swedish National Bank, quantitative easing

   Pound, 226, 231                                (usage), 169

Retail sales                              Swiss Franc (CHF), 233Ł238

   British Pound, 229, 231                   EURCHF 10-year chart, 239f

   Canadian Dollar, 271                   Swiss futures, foreign interest rate futures

   ex inflation (New Zealand), 264                (interest rate differentials), 237

   Swiss Franc, 240                       Swiss National Bank (SNB), 234Ł236

Retail Sales Index, US Dollar, 209           Governing Board, committee, 234

Risk aversion, 256Ł260                       1.20 EUR/CHF peg

Risk management, 86Ł89                            implementation/abandonment, 236

Risk reversals, 187Ł190                      1.20 floor, intervention, 197

   call/put flips, 82Ł83                     open market operations, 235Ł236

   EURUSD risk reversal chart, 188f          regulations, changes, 237Ł238

   example, 83f                              target interest rate range, 235

   GBPUSD risk reversal chart, 189f          tools, 235Ł236

   options, 84                            Switzerland, 234Ł240

   tables, 83, 188Ł190

Risk-reward ratio, 86                     T

Rollover, 181

                                          Tankan Report (Japan), 246                         275

S                                         Technical analysis, 8Ł9, 38Ł39

                                             short-term trader usage, 31                     INDEX

Safe haven reserve currencies, USD        Technical trading

   consideration, 206Ł207                    double Bollinger Bands, usage, 101

Seasonally (SA) adjusted terms, 220          multiple time frame analysis, 91

Sentiment, impact, 187                       strategy, 111Ł116

Short trades                              Time horizon, 160

   deals, waiting, 118Ł119                Tops (selection), double Bollinger Bands (usage),

   double zeros, 112Ł113                          103Ł110

   fader, 130                             Trade flows, 33, 35Ł36, 41Ł43

   inside days breakout play, 124         Trades

   strategy rules, 103, 110                  existing/completed trades, listing, 78Ł80

   trades, 106f, 136f                        long trades, strategy rules, 103

Simple moving average (SMA),                 parameters, 73

   price levels, 143                         short trades, strategy rules, 103

Slippage, limitation, 8                      time frame, determination, 84Ł86

Smithsonian Agreement, 18Ł20              Trade-weighted index (TWI), 252

Soros, George, 3, 22Ł24                   Trading, 89

Stability and Growth Pact, 225               curbs, absence, 7

Stagflation (1970s), 20                      environments, 80Ł84, 81f

Sterilized interventions, 195             Trading journal

Stocks, analysis, 9Ł11                       currency pair checklist, 74Ł78

Stop losses, 86Ł89, 112                      existing/completed trades, listing, 78Ł80

Stops, usage, 201                            toolbox, usage, 80Ł81
       Trading journal (Continued)                         current rate, 244

       trades, expectations, 78                            daily chart, 131f

       usage, 73Ł81                                        global financial crisis, 165f

       Transaction costs, 6, 12                            Japan BoJ QE, 173f

       Treasury International Capital flow data            long trade, 109f

               (TIC data), 211                             perfect order setup, 147f

       Treaty on European Union (Maastricht Treaty),       September 11th chart, 40f

               28, 215, 216                                stocks/bonds, positive correlation, 245

       Trend                                            US Dollar (USD), 203Ł211

       determination, double Bollinger Bands               devaluation (1985), 20Ł22

               (usage), 107                                index, 207f, 208

       direction, momentum consistency, 83Ł84              market, 2Ł3

       joining, double Bollinger Bands (usage),            strength, 32

               107Ł110                                     world currency (Bretton Woods), 17Ł18

       trading rules, 81f                               USDSGD perfect order setup, 146f

       Trending environment, 83Ł84, 144                 U.S.-Iraqi War, 167Ł168, 168f

       Trending markets, 38Ł39, 80                      U.S. presidential election, political uncertainty

       20-day breakout trade, 135                          (2004), 165

       charts, 136f, 137f, 138f                         U.S. quantitative easing, 170

       examples, 136Ł138                                US Treasuries, 208Ł209, 217Ł218

       strategy rules, 135Ł138

       trades, 135Ł136                                  V

       24-hour market, 5Ł6                              Volatility
                                                           Asian session, 55f
276    Two-day low method, 87

INDEX  U                                                   European session, 57f
                                                           implied volatility, decrease, 81Ł82

       UK quantitative easing, 170                         long-term volatility, 192
       Ukraine-Russia crisis (2014), 162                   option volatilities, 191Ł194
                                                           US session, 56f
          EURUSD Ukraine crisis, 163f

       United Kingdom, 224Ł226, 229Ł231

       Bundesbank monetary policies, impact, 3          W

          exchange rate mechanism (ERM), relationship,  White, Harry Dexter, 17
                22Ł24                                   World Bank, formation, 18
                                                        World Trade Organization (WTO), China entry,
          trading activity, 117
       United States, 209Ł211                                    33Ł34

          Canadian Dollar, correlation, 268

          import/export volume, 204                     Y
       Unsterilized interventions, 195

       Uptick rule, absence, 7                          Yen carry trades, 160

       USDCAD charts, 94f, 95f, 115f, 141f, 180f, 270f Yield differentials fixed-income instruments,

       USDCHF Iraq War, 168f                               181

       USD/EUR chart, 34f                               Yield spread table, 182f

       USDJPY                                           Yuan revaluation, 3Ł4

       Asian crisis price action, 27f

       Bollinger Band chart, 82f                        Z
       charts, 10f, 40f, 92f, 93f, 131f, 147f, 193f,
                                                        Zero interest rate policy (ZIRP) (Japan), 243
             196f, 198f, 199f
            WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT

