Welcome to the Inner Circle Workshop

                  This is my personal opportunity to teach you the best of what I have learned
over the last 37 years and, hopefully, jump start your trading and learning. I'm looking
forward to it.

                                                                                                              Larry Williams

MARKET ADDAGE #1--Charts don't move the Markets... Markets move the
charts.

Despite what you have read, heard or have come to believe, by and large it is my experience that
technical analysis (chart reading), is not an effective investment strategy. Its usage is limited to
timing our entry and exits into and out of trades.

Thus I want to begin this workshop with revealing to you what does work, what does set up

major market up and downswings. I have isolated the major "fundamental" conditions seen at

this significant market turning point over the last 30+ years. These conditions set the stage for

market moves that technical analysis can "time". Without these conditions we are destined to a

life of perplexity and confusion. With these conditional set ups we will be working with the

major causes of market movements.      :

The "SET UP" criteria you will learn:     -

1. HOW TO DETERMINE FUNDAMENTAL UNDER AND OVER

VALUATION

2. GET IN PHASE WITH THE POWERS THAT MAKE THE MARKETS

3. THE "END OF THE TREND" INDICATOR

4. THE PINCH AND THE PAUNCH TOP AND BOTTOM INDICATOR                                                                          *m

5. HOW TO FADE THE USUALLY WRONG PUBLIC

6. HOW TO SUPERCHARGE SEASONAL TRADING STRATEGIES

7. THE OPEN INTEREST "PLAY" I'VE BEEN USING SINCE 1970

8. THE SECRET MESSAGE OF SPREADS...PRICE PREMIUMS
IT'S ALL ABOUT SYNERGISIM- While it is true that many major highs and lows are ·
correctly "called" by any one of these tools, the best plays come from a cluster of at least 4 of
these Set Up tools being present. I'm a team player, I want at least 4 members of my team .
present when I venture out to bag major highs and lows.

L) HOW TO DETERMINE FUNDAMENTAL UNDER AND OVER

VALUATION                                                                                ~-';,*:V^

Technicians have bandied about the concept of overbought and oversold since the first chart was
drawn, but what they looked at was only price action. Indeed, the DJIA has been overbought
since 1983! All bull markets are "overbought", all bear markets seriously "oversold". ""'·" · / · ; ·

In 1998, while searching for a better way to determine value, a novel thought crossed my mind.

Value in stocks is measured by P/E ratios, dividends and the like, things not available to us as
                                                                                  " -;i · ' · - - ' .
commodity traders.

What is value is the notion I wrestled with most of 1997 and 1998. How could I determine if
Wheat was overvalued? And, would that same measurement work for Pork Bellies or Cotton?
What is value, and how do we measure it?

History and most major religions teach us there is an ultimate storehouse of value.. ..Gold. ···'·· ; ,

This got me to thinking, why not compare the price of all commodities to this ultimate

storehouse to see if major undervalued and overvalued zones vs. gold could be isolated.

The search began with a study of spreads and almost at once I knew I was on the track of

something very good.                                                                              ;-

The evolution of this idea can now be stated quite simply;

Divide the price of any commodity by the price of Gold (this shows the spread relationship) and
multiply this by 100 to normalize. Then construct either a 2 week or 2 period exponential
average of this spread. Also construct a 22-week average or 22 period exponential of the spread.
It does not make much difference which mathematical formula you us. Finally, subtract the 2
period average from the 22 period average. The resulting product, the Preliminary Valuation
Index (PVT), is clearly shows high and low levels of valuation that are not present in any
technical indicators I know.

UNDERSTANDING WHAT YOU ARE LOOKING FOR... Initially, I was not able to isolate a

"be all, end all" number that represented +/-values for all commodities. My next step was tc z?

the same thing with this index I do with the Commercial and Public Sentiment Index. By th j_

mean I then constructed essentially a %R indicator. The math is to take the current weeks

reading and subtract from that the lowest reading of the last three years. That amount is then

divided by an amount arrived at my subtracting the lowest reading of the last three years from

the highest reading of the last three years.  ·             '·-..-·'  v^  :..;*,           :«.;··.
What we have accomplished is the construction of an index we can use to measure overvalued
and undervalued zones across the board for all markets. All one needs is a long-term weekly
chart of the commodity under question and the Williams Valuation Index (WVI).TM.

I simply draw a line across the extreme readings found at major market highs and lows. As a~
example, using the Genesis Charting Software we see that most all major highs have come wiih
the index in the 75 area while most major lows are indicated by a reading in the 15 area. You are
free to "move" these zones around a bit, but generally speaking you will see these are the
readings associated with major highs, 75% or higher and major lows, under 15%.

NOTE: Some times the index will be a little early, and yes, sometimes it may not even be in the
major high/low zones. Since we are using a combination of our tools of the trade, don't let this
bother you. Plus, we still need to determine our entry levels. Suffice it to say, though, that once
an overvalued or undervalued zone is indicated, we need to be alert. Big game is near, get your
guns ready.

Also note, this is does not work at all like a technical oscillator. As I will show in the seminar
there are numerous times a market is flat or even declining, yet the Valuation Index
clearly--and correctly--tells us the market is over valued. The opposite is equally true.

Now let's look at some examples. The first is Wheat and I'm presenting charts covering the last
30 years, 1968 to 1999. Just this index alone alerted us to most all major highs and lows in this
market. This is remarkable consistency.

See Pages 1 Through 4

Cotton has little in common with Wheat, but the same thing can be seen in the WVI Again, most

all-major highs appear with our index in the 75% area and lows in the 15% area. Additional

long-term charts are shown for your understanding and persona "track record" of the major

commodities.            ,'

Seepages

Pork Bellies or Platinum all show the same relationship to Gold as the next charts demonstrate.
I'm also showing here most all major markets with my WVI tm for your study and historical
records.

See Pages 6 Through 22
     SO HOW DO WE MEASURE OVERVALUED AND UNDERVALUED IN GOLD???

Obviously, we can't spread Gold vs. Gold, so what are we do to? My answer to this is to
construct the same measurement, but spreading Gold against Treasury Bonds. As I will show
when we discuss Will Go, there is a very strong and powerful correlation between these two
markets.

  ee Pages 23 Through 2

CONCERNING THE CURRENCIES--Currencies do well with the WVI, but perhaps do
better spreading against the Dollar Index. The next charts show each of the major commodities'
against both Gold and the Dollar Index. I'll let you choose.

See Pages 25 Through 30

2.) GET IN PHASE WITH THE POWERS THAT MAKE THE MARKETS

CLEARING UP ON THE COMMERCIALS

Many, many analysts have passed by this treasure house of market forecasting techniques. I was
first introduced to the concept by Bill Meehan in the late 1960's, so I guess it's safe to say I have
more experience with this tool than any other current analyst.

There are several critical points I need to share with you about this index, to begin let's
talk about the index itself. First of all it is constructed of just the large hedger activity as released
by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and can be garnered every other week (in the
old days it came only once a month). On their web site at · HYPERLINK
http:/AVWW.CFTC.GOV · WWW.CFTC.GOV* , there is a bar there that says "Commitment of
Traders", click on it for the data. This is the only data I use from the CFTC, I do not use the
large traders, (funds and trend followers), or small traders.

I construct the index by taking the highest value of the net difference between long and short
positions for the current reporting period. Then subtract from the lowest such reading of the last
three years, this value is then divided by the difference between the highest and lowest readings
of the last three years. This normalizes their activity.

Keep in mind the Commercials are the ultimate trend enders. They are not top and bottom
pickers, they accumulate and distribute. As such they are usually early. Also the mere fact thev
are or have just become net long or short may not have great meaning. This is not like a lignx *?
switch that is on or off, bullish or bearish.

There are three important ways to use this index.

      L Extremely high/low readings
      2. 12 month high/low readings
      3. The Crouch (rollovers/rollups)
A) EXTREMELY HIGH/LOW READINGS--There do appear to be absolute levels that aic

found at major market highs and lows. Certainly any reading greater than 75% is bullish and ...

than 2 5 % bearish.      -.,,         -....,-

B) 12 MONTH HIGHS AND LOWS--What I'm looking for here are readings that are higher
than all values for the last 12 months, that's bullish. Readings lower than all postings for the last
12 months are bearish. In both instances this is irrespective of the % or absolute raw value
reading.

See Pages 31 Through 35

C) THE "CROUCH" WITH THE COMMERCIALS

AN OVERVIEW OF COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY-- For the last 25 years I've been talking

and writing about how this group of traders sets the tone for most all market activity. Nothing

has changed. The markets were set up by these people, brokers and, to facilitate business. The

exchanges are not there to accommodate speculation, they serve a commercial purpose and we

speculators are a mere pawn, and useful one, in the grand scale of things. ..  -,'.,>.., ;";v-

Traders have taken the wrong view of Commercial activity. It is not a light switch that is on or
off. What does matter is a very high level of buying/selling over the last 12 months. That's the
initial set up. We can measure this by taking the 3-year high and low of Commercial activity
and dividing that into the current reading minus the 3-year low. That's the COT index you'll
see in most chart books and the Genesis software.

In this fashion we can watch the pendulum of Commercial activity to see when it has reached an
extreme. It will surely move from one extended reading to another, to the opposite side, from
bullish to bearish, and in the process will go from positive to negative. This change in direction
from bullish to less bullish is not bearish, nor is a change from + to -.

Indeed, it is often a positive sign, indicating the move is underway. You need not worry about
this and in fact can use the roll over as a sign the move has begun! The examples prove my ,
point. The roll over is an early indication the trend move has begun, not that it is over!

See Pages 36Through41

'The long and short of Commercial activity is that a 12-month high/low in their buying/sellinr ::
a signal for a trend reversal. These people do not try to buy tops and bottoms they accumulate
and distribute. My final point is that when they are diametrically opposed to the public maj<»
moves usually develop, i.e., if the public is excessively bearish while the Commercials are
heavily long prices will rally.
But there's another point you should know about, one I call the "crouch" as it looks like the
commercials crouch into their buying/selling then spring from this extreme position and a new
trend begins. The amazing rule is...

                   WHEN THE COMMERCIALS INCREASE THEIR SELLING
                                         THE MARKETS RALLIES!

          WHEN THE COMMERCIALS INCREASE THEIR BUYING
                             THE MARKETS DECLINES! -

Yes, you read correctly an increase in Commercial buying is bearish--if it comes at a time they
have moved to an extended or high level of selling. When they decrease there of buying
(increase selling) from a high level of buying the markets usually rally. This is like a turn of the
tide and signals excellent points to hop aboard as the following charts illustrate. One needs to
first see an over-extended move by the commercials, the crouch in case of a sell, then it appears
they change directions and the markets follow.

3.) THE "END OF THE TREND" INDICATOR

        Discovery consists in seeing what everybody has seen and thinking what nobody else
has thought.

          Albert Szent-Gyorgi

Years ago Welles Wilder came forth with the Directional Market Index and the ADX line. I
have found this a very, very valuable long-term tool to call major highs and lows when used in a

certain fashion. Unfortunately, this does not signal all tops and bottoms, but when it does,

especially in conjunction with Sentiment and/or commercials, you have as sure a deal as I know.

This understanding on the index is original to my work.

                                                         >. - '--·'

A "·,,;"  +60 DMI SELL SIGNALS

          AND MAJOR BUYS

 These are even fewer and farther in between, but .they are a snap to spot. All you need look for is
 a DMI reading of over 60. Such readings have an excellent record of saying a top is at hand. __
r Readings of > 60 in market declines indicate excellent buying opportunities at hand.

 Excellent sell signals have also come from readings over 40 but I would want such selling
 indications to be backed by BOTH Sentiment and Commercial sells as well.

Do not be misled by the fact it takes only two paragraphs to define these signals! Readings over
60 present wonderful opportunities for the informed risk taker.
See Pages 42 Through 53

DIVERGENT SIGNALS WORK VERY WELL HERE

We'll also be looking for markets that go to new highs but are not matched by new highs in the
DMI. Market buys can be just the reverse, a new low not matched by higher DMI readings.
Finally, I have noted major lows that have had lower DMI readings, then on the plunge a ver>
high value > 40 is registered indicating a selling panic.

Even a quick study of your charts will reveal the amazing power of this approach. Note that this
technique was FIRST fully revealed in January 1994 to hundreds of fellow traders.

4.) THE PINCH AND THE PAUNCH                                                        Vx

I have noticed one more relationship in the DMI (ADX) and Stochastic innerworkings that can
be of real value to the trader looking for intermediate term set up plays.

Keep in mind the DMI simply shows if a market is trending, in other words does it have any ,,.
strength to what it is doing? If so it will be steadily increasing, if not it will be declining. , ^;^

Stochastic on the other hand measures how far the market is getting away from price x days ago

regardless of the integrity of the move.                                         H

THE PINCH.. .So consider what it means when Stochastic is rising, and above 75%, the usual

overbought area, while the DMI has been declining. This suggest to me the price move that

pushed stochastic higher had no "umph" or meaning behind it and any sells coming should be

good ones. This appears as a "pinch" on charts as the DMI is coming down, the Stochastic

coming up, as the lines pinch together.                                             ...

A buying indication is just the opposite, Stochastic declining and below 25%, while DMI is

rapidly advancing. This suggests a selling panic as, usually, price declines on a declining DMI.

This appears as a widening between these two lines, a "paunch" effect.  .......

See Pages 65 Through 73

THE PAUNCH SIGNAL.. .When the weekly 7-bar ADX line rises above 40 a buy point of __
lasting duration is at hand. The + 40 reading does not cause the entry, only tells us the time
,ripe.

CRITICAL POINT...This pattern, of going from below 40 to above 40 only creates buy sisnais
if the market is substantially oversold as the crossing takes place. What is going on is that no;
only is the market oversold, Stochastic below 25%, but downside volatility has picked up. This
means a selling climax is at hand and a market bottom very near as not only have prices been
suppressed, sellers have become irrational, almost dumping at the market, hence the DMI picks
up. (Another ideal confirmation comes from the Market Sentiment or Commercial data

confirming a high or low).                       ,:     rr^vv- ...-.-...·;·.

Additionally, it will pay to wait a turn down in the index to signal the trend move is over or

least in the terminal stages of market atrophy.      :

See Pages 74 Through 86

IF YOU WILL JUST LIMIT YOURSELF TO THESE TRADES YOU WILL TRADE LESS
OFTEN AND CATCH MOST ALL MAJOR HIGHS AND LOWS.

ON DAILY CHARTS TOO--Yes, these formations do appear on daily and even interdaily
charts and are usually pretty good set up patterns to alert us to important trend changes for the
time frame we are trading. My use here is to help us further evaluate and zero on major trend
changes using weekly bar chart data.

AN ADDITIONAL USE--In recent years I have noticed that a very low DMI/ADX
reading, below 20, at the same time the Commercials are heavy buyers sets up beautiful--
and immediate--buy signals. This makes sense, what's going on is an apparently lackless
market where it appears nothing is going on, but under the surface the commercials have
been accumulating telling us to expect higher prices.

5.) HOW TO FADE THE USUALLY WRONG PUBLIC

While the Commercials are usually correct, but early, the public is often correct--mid stream--
but when they become excessively bullish or bearish they are most often dead wrong. This is
even more true when the are bucking the commercials.

Hence our best sentiment play is these two groups in opposition,

I use the Market Vane index (626) 395-7436 or the Genesis Data index. Both are similar in
nature. Market Vane measures the most wrong crowd, newsletter writers at brokerage firms.
Using just this index many major highs and lows appear. It is a good check on your own
emotions. There are shorter, daily, measures of sentiment; they work good for that time frame
not for longer-term set-ups.

See Pages 74 Through 86
                   THE YEAR IS NEVER WHAT IT STARTS OUT TO BE.... v > i \

                      (Reallypossible,... real time trading with 85%accuracy?) < : ; . · '

There are few sure bets in trading commodities, but one of the better is that what investors ar~ =
doing at the first of the year will be wrong! In short the highly emotional "planning" time rigni
at the first of the year is most often apt to be wrong...all those investors dreams will soon be ---·
as under. I will use weekly charts to establish all of the following points.

To check this thesis I carefully recorded, for the last 8 years what the Market Vane measure of

investor sentiment was telling us at the start of each year. Readings of over 75% bullishness I

took to indicate tops, readings below 33% as buys. The following list indicates the potential

buys, when the index was under 33% and the sells with readings of greater than 75%. Here are

the results:          ·                                                    .           ·-" f:,

SELLS                 -'                               ' . '·/"                        =";

1988 Copper, Beans, Wheat, Sugar '. .'"'·,,.../- :-v.,;.......,/.
                                                                           :*::: ; -^
1989 Crude Oil, Corn, Oats, Meal, Wheat

1990 Gold, Crude Oil, O.J., Cattle, F.Cattle                               .. · -'. ,  vj
1991 Gold, Copper, Corn, Coffee, Sugar, Cattle, F.Catt, Dmark                          :;i vv,

1992 Wheat, Pound, D.Mark, Swiss F.              . .,                      - . . . . .... :. , ·

1993 Oats, Meal, Oil, Coffee, Lumber, F. Cattle                ^·"~        V^v- ^^ /··';

1994 Gold, Silver, Beans, Meal, Oil, Wheat, Oil, Sug, Bonds ·                          ^ t!lV · - ° ·
       Corn, Cotton

1995 Beans, Oil, Sugar, Cattle, F. Cattle ,, :·.·.;.. .". . . . , -. ( _,  :; -\\,' f.v.

BUYS          ; :P^'-^-- '           '   . " " " · · ' " ' · ' : " ; ' .jim^mf^
_  -- nr                      ,-,                                                      , ->.-..._ . _ . . . . . ,, .  _

1988 Cocoa, Crude Oil, Bellies
1989 Silver, Cocoa, O.J., D. Mark
1990 Copper, Cocoa, Cotton
1991 Beans, Meal, Cocoa, Hogs, Swiss Franc
1992 Copper, Corn, Sugar, O.J., Cattle, Hogs
1993 Gold, Sugar, Bellies
1994 Coffee, Hogs, Yen
1995 Beans, Meal, C. Oil, B. Pound, D Mark, Yen, Swiss F.

These "start of the year excesses" have proven to be excellent set-ups for major long-term

moves. Now, no one, at least no one I know can predict 12 months in advance and I don't think
rany of my tools can, but they can tell us about trends for the first 3 to 6 months. Then the

integrity of those trends will tell us if that condition will last all year long.

              '-·  V

The purpose of measuring investor sentiment is to tell what the crowd is doing, as they are

usually wrong. What I have discovered is the crowd is even better at being wrong at the pivotal

start of the new-year time period!
6.) SUPERCHARGING SEASONAL TRADING

While not perfect, seasonal patterns are a tool every trader should have in his or her arsenal wncn i^~^

you go hunting for big game. The problem is these patterns are not repeated every year, gosh 7~^

that would not make trading any fun. Hence, the pattern or tendency becomes a tool or back-: · · · · ^^^

to place trades against.            ,·                   ;V:'v'.;. : v, ;

I think the ideal trade will have three of our major tools AND backed by a seasonal. If I have
two "set up" trades one with a seasonal, one without, I will take the one with,

,:                        THE STRONGEST SEASONAL TRADES  >;

I had no idea what an "industry" my 1974 book, "Sure Thing Commodity Trading", "How                    -·" ·. :
Seasonal Factors Influence Commodity Prices", would create. Maybe that's because it was the
first book ever written on the subject. But more than likely because we never envisioned how                ;
easy it would be to study these influences with the advent of the computer.

While my original work was done by hand and took over 12 months looking at charts and
tabulations of prices, this same work can now be done in an afternoon with a laptop.

But a problem remains the seasonal trades are about as reliable as Mark Fuhrman's testimony. '·'<· fc.;
Which got me to thinking. . The reason these trades are so spotty is that most studies the seasonal
crowd uses are based on 5 to 15 years of data. That means the current data base they use goes
back to 1985.

The following tendencies were based on two time periods, the most recent 15 years. . plus. . I
went back to my original 1974 book, which covered 1960 to 1973 and found the trades that still
exhibit themselves in the current data. I next put these into a monthly trade recap. These recaps
do not give specific buy sell dates, as I do not think that is the best use of the information. The
best use is to advise us of these very strong patterns. In each case the pattern is that most all the
time prices have closed up/down for the months in question, hence these indicate pretty big
trades.

JANUARY                   DOWN
SWISS FRANC               DOWN
DMARK                     DOWN
BPOUND                    DOWN
OATS                      UP
CATTLE                    UP
HOGS                      UP
LUMBER

FEBRUARY                  DOWN
TBONDS                    DOWN
SPRANG                    UP
COPPER

                                10
S MEAL '"·:  DOWN
SOIL         UP
CATTLE       UP

MARCH        DOWN  (1ST HALF OF MONTH)
WHEAT        DOWN
B POUND      UP
S BEANS
             UP
APRIL
O JUICE      UP
             DOWN
JUNE         DOWN
T BONDS      DOWN
BPOUND       DOWN
SMEAL        DOWN
OJUICE
COTTON       DOWN
LUMBER       UP
             UP
JULY         DOWN
T. BONDS     UP
GOLD
CATTLE       UP (ALL CURRENCIES BEST
COTTON i
LUMBER       UP TO BW MID MONTH)     - ·· X: Xv

AUGUST       UP ' . -· ' -·" · -· -
BPOUND
JYEN         UP
DMARK V
SPRANG       DOWN (FIRST TWO WEEKS ONLY)
S MEAL
CATTLE       DOWN
BELLIES
COFFEE       UP    · ..      ··:. <
COTTON
             UP (STARTING MID MONTH)
SEPTEMBER
BONDS        DOWN        . . . .-·; t
B POUND
JYEN         VP (FOR FIRST HALF OF MONTH)
DMARK        DOWN (TOPS FIRST FEW DAYS OF SEPT)
SPRANG       UP (BOTTOMS SECOND HALF OF MONTH)
COPPER
COTTON       U P :.:..-v- :v;/a,j.-.-- > = - , , -
LUMBER
             UP

             DOWN
             DOWN (STARTS MID MONTH)
             DOWN

                         11
OCTOBER        DOWN (ABOUT OCT. 1OTH)
B POUND        VP (FIRST HALF OF MONTH)
JYEN
               UP            ' . : ' ·. " -:-... - . . . & \Ł-^. "
D MARK
SPRANG         UP

S MEAL r       DOWN .:'^i-h- :·'"..<-\ :- . - - . . *>'· .;--'v'x,. ;
COCOA
COFFEE         DOWN "' ^ '" Jv : : " ' ' *'\
COTTON
               UP

               DOWN (this is just so-so)

NOVEMBER       UP (STARTS ABOUT 5TH TRADING DAY)
T BONDS        DOWN
SPRANG         DOWN (FOR FIRST HALF OF MONTH)
COPPER         DOWN
SMEAL          DOWN (FOR FIRST HALF OF MONTH)
SUGAR          UP (RALLY STARTS ABOUT THE 20TH)
LUMBER

DECEMBER

T BONDS            UP

B POUND        UP (LATE IN MONTH)

JYEN               UP
SPRANG         UP                 .   ^   ·,.,.  /;'.:,   .';'';:':';!,v-
D MARK                       ^?'
GOLD           UP                 ;-  A'  '. '"  '''' -'
                                         ---- ' "*"'· :
                   DOWN

COPPER             UP (AFTER FIRST WEEK)

BEANS              DOWN                    ·:;..:
SMEAL i            DOWN               _ . -, v ,/r ',

HOGS           /' -,:· . UP

COFFEE         V.>" -UP               '

SUGAR .- ·x DOWN

O.J. y'- -1' DOWN (STARTS MID MONTH)

LUMBER ......      UP

               MOST RELIABLE TRADES

LUMBER         SHORT IN MID MARCH

CURRENCIES SHORT IN MARCH

COPPER         SHORT APRIL

COCOA          BUY LATE JUNE V ^ w ;

T BONDS        SHORT FEBRUARY

B POUND        SHORT JUNE

DMARK          n             11

SPRANG         ii            n

SMEAL          SHORT DEC                                  i
CORN           SHORT LATE JUNE -;,:

WHEAT          BUY , « ;

                                                          12
BELLIES  SELL NOVEMBER         \ / :'^ ;^VvH-,vr
CATTLE
BONDS    BUY JANUARY/FEBRUARY

         A JANUARY DECLINE INTO MARCH LOWS, RALLY

         INTO JUNE 1STH, DECLINE OR SIDEWAYS UNTIL

         LATE SEPT, RALLY INTO CHRISTMAS  ,....... .,,.,·.,

MAJOR SEASONAL PLAYS...Jake Bernstein, is certainly the most noted student of sc^or^:
plays. Jake and I have been buddies and competitors since the late 1970's. Certainly Jake nas
done more than any other individual to study seasonal influences. The following indications are
based on over 40 years of data Jake has painstakingly compiled Several of his favorites call for
COPPER to top in March bottom in June and rally well at the end of the year. SOYBEANS
should rally from January to a May-June peak, decline into a September-October low then stage
a year-end rally. BONDS have usually rallied from mid February to mid May, slumped into a
mid July low and rallied into mid November. COFFEE is most apt to rally from the end of
December to mid June, then tank until October where it bounces up until the end of the year.
BEAN MEAL bottoms in February, tops in late June declines into October low. Look for a
low in SUGAR in mid April with a bullish bias all the way to a mid November high, then back
down to the April lows. PORK BELLIES have most often rallied from March to July-August
then declined into November lows. WHEAT IS THE MOST CONSISTENT SEAONALI
HA VE FOUND. Expect selling pressure from January to late July then a rally until after
Christmas. CORN has been just the opposite, it rallies from February to Mid July, declines until
right around the end of the year. The February/March rally has been very reliable.

The astute trader will focus on seasonal indications ad look for confirmation from trend ;
indications as well as rest of our tools during these windows of opportunity.

7.) THE OPEN INTERST "PLAY" I'VE BEEN USING SINCE 1970

Opening up the way we can use this exciting early warning indication

While you may have read about this tool in other of my writings it's one that we need to be
reminded of. As you may recall, the operating rule is that IF price is in an up trend, then enters
a trading range and Open Interest declines (usually about 20%) expect a rally. Sells come from
a down trending market entering a trading range while Open Interest increases about 20%.

This is the basic rule as taught me by Bill Meehan in 1970. The reason it works is that the
decline in O.I indicates the commercials are most likely covering their shorts. Keeping in mind
they account for about 60% of market volume or AND they are usually hedging, selling, r-iu
felt the reduction meant they were bullish and he expected a further trend move.

I'm showing a few of the 1997 O.I. plays for your study. The first is Sugar in October. Notice
the nice up trend, next an elongated 3-month trading range, then a rapid decline in O.I. rfore
the break to new highs! ·> -.·.,:,, ··...,..-

Live Cattle gave a similar buy in June 1997 when O.I. fell off in the face of a trading range and
shortly thereafter prices skipped to new highs.
Silver, while not fitting our rule of being in a trading range had a massive O.I. reduction while

the Commercial/Public data was bullish. AG sprang from $4.60 an ounce to $5.30 in just a

matter of days.  .,                           .. ,

Copper in March/April 1997 (a move we traded) was a perfect example of this technique. _j_

This last trade opens up an interesting door. . .can we take O.I. formations that do not h-v:: :::·_-
trend factor going--if we have our bigger guns blazing away? The answer is yes. In fact there
appears to be some relationships between the Commercials getting excessively bullish/bearish
and O.I. moves, but I have not been able to codify trading procedures.. .yet.

My studies show some excellent trades can be made using the following sequence; first we have

the Commercial/Public set up, then a rally off the lows followed by a trading range with our O.I.

reduction. Typically, Commercials sell rallies, so if we see a reduction, following a set up, it's a

decent bet prices will move higher. ; . . : . ,,                        ;

8.) THE SECRET MESSAGE OF SPREADS...PRICE PREMIUMS

As you know, spreads are among the most powerful and fundamental of all market indicators.

Yet, most analysts blow them off like Al Gore at a Republican fundraiser. I've never been able

to figure this out because even a cursory glance reveals how important they are. I look at a

spread (that is the difference between the nearby contracts closing price and the next or

successive months) in two major ways.               ; . - . ; ' ; - - · '":

            1. Price Premium Structure
            2. Sfrengthejiing and weakening of the spread

PRICE PREMIUM STRUCTURE--This term, "a premium" simply means the nearby
contract is trading at a higher price than the next month out. This is a fundamental anomaly, it
should not be this way. The distant months should always sell at a higher value.

The only thing that can create a premium is someone wanting the nearby contract badly enough
that they are willing to pay more for it than the distant months. My belief is that this can only be
the commercial, hence this designates a commercial bull market. A non-premium or "carrying
charge" market is meaningless, telling us nothing.

The important point is not just that there is a premium, after all a market can be at a premium, -*-

but winding down or losing it. Thus what we will be looking for is the

"premium coming on", that point in time when the nearby actually trades at a higher \a.^^ ..Ii^i--

the distant. That's bullish telling us to look to get long. Traditionally markets go to a          m-

approximately one of the following two ways;

ee Page 81

                                              14
ONCE THE PREMIUM IS THERE...We need to turn our attention to what the premium
doing in relationship to the market. A new high in price should have a new high in the spr?:.^. T
it does not, that is a negative sign, buyers were no longer bidding for the nearby.

On a correction the premium should out perform price action, i.e., price makes a new shon term
rally low and the premium does not.. .it "holds up". That is very bullish action telling us rnp, ^
correction is not the start of a market slide.

The fact there are only three paragraphs here should not dissuade you from studying this
relationship. I have written about it in other places.

LARRY WILLIAMS ENTRY TECHNIQUES AND RULES

        Most traders begin and end with entry techniques. I don't see it that way...my base is
set up trading, but I still need entry points. Here they are...

1.) CHANNEL BREAKOUT TRADING

Don't sneeze at this...first popularized by my friend DickDonchian in the late 1940's...it hit the
big time with Richard Dennis and his Turtles in the 1980's. Last year the Turtles are reported to
have made about $100,000,000 on their managed funds. Granted, they have a zillion dollars
under management now, and have implemented may of their own rules, but still.. .a
$100,000,000 is a lot of money!

I broke the dam wide open when in 1988 I promoted seminars for Russell Sands, the first "Turtle
to Talk" and reveal all. The system, which Russell still teaches, is based on buying 20-day
breakout (of the highest high of the last 20 days, lowest low for selling) with a 10-day stop or 50
day breakouts with a 20-day stop.

This works.  /

We can make it work better by waiting for a setup market--then and only then--using a channel
break out. My research shows a 12-day breakout works best for the set-ups.

                                  llfl

                                       11

                              15
                             THE IMMUTABLE LAW OF AVERAGES

  Markets can only be understood backwards;
But the problem is they must be traded foreword

Timing is always a traders greatest problem/opportunity. I do not know of ANY purely technical

timing system that maximizes profits. My thinking is that by selecting trades based on th- ··-····-

and then bringing in the timing tools we will have more success than just taking technical ouy

and sells signals. ······'-  ··

Surely, this is one of the most important laws operating on our planet. Just as with the Law of
Gravity, this law impacts our everyday life, every day. On average the weather in San Diego is
72 degrees with fluctuations above and below the average. WHENEVER the temperature rises
above that average for very long it's a sure bet that eventually things will cool back down. Even
our personal relationships are that way; they are pretty good on average, yet run in hot and cold
streaks.

2.) THE 18 BAR PATH OF RIGHESTOUSNESS

I have chosen to use an 18-day moving average to help us understand commodity prices. There
is no magic to this average, it was chosen largely because is has been used for years and is
readily available in chart books and software.

While none of us would resist the Law of Gravity, traders every day disregard the Law of
Averages. The basic rule is that if price is below the 18 bar average you probably don't want to
be long unless there is an EXCEPTIONAL REASON to buck the trend.

PATTERNS TO THE LAW OF AVERAGES

KISS AND COLLAPSE--This is the primary pattern that sucks traders into losses. The length
of the moving average does not matter; the length simply identifies or isolates your time frame.
When a market has been in a steep up/down trend and takes a run up/down to the moving
average it will usually trade their for a bit then--just when we went long--collapse, pulling back
to the dominant trend.

BUMP AND RUN--This is the pattern I like to see when looking for a trend reversal. In this
case price runs into the moving average horizontally while in the Kiss and Collapse the meting is
the result of a vertical move. Bump and Go is a visual representation of trend slowing
suggesting a much better probability of a trend change.

BREAK AND GO--Our final repetitive pattern takes place when price rises above the
average signaling a trend change, the pulls back or actually works both sides of the ave
resuming the trend change move. This is a very powerful move you should be on the
for.

                                 16
See Pages 88 Through 92

              SIMPLE TREND ENTRY TECHNIQUE

Precise timing of our entry is the greatest problem/opportunity. I do not know of A_ Y
purely technical timing system that maximizes profits. After all these years, thousands 01
research hours and who knows how much money in research I have still not found a msmv
profitable timing system that can be used on just one market. Trend following systems
work only on a big basket of commodities on the assumption something in the basket will
have a big move and pay off the little losses.

        THE ESSEENCE OF MY METHOD IS TO FIND A MARKET SET UP BY

COMMERICALS, PUBLIC, SEASONAL, OPEN INTEREST, DMI/ADX, ACCUMULATION

DISTRIBUTION, PREMIUMS AND THE LIKE--AND THEN AND ONLY THEN

ESTABLISH A POSITON ONCE THERE HAS BEEN A CHANGE IN TREND. THERE

ARE TWO COMPONENTS THE SET UP, WHICH IS NOT A REASON FOR ENTRY, AND

THE ENTRY WHICH IS A TIMING MECHANISM NOT THE REASON FOR THE

TRADE.                                                                .,:-:;,'

         HARD AND FAST RULES FOR THE 18 DAY AVERAGE

A buy signal will require that we have two consecutive days with lows that are above
(greater than) the 18 day moving average of closing prices. Neither of these day can be an
inside day (that's a day with a lower high than the previous day as well as a higher low).
Given this condition we will go long at the highest high of these two bars.

A sell signal will require that we have two consecutive days with highs that are below (less
than) the 18 day average of closing prices. Neither of these can be an inside day. Given
this condition we will go short at the lowest low of these two bars.

This system does make money on its' own as you can see from the following listing of taking all
buys and sells without any setup criteria. This is comforting, we know it works, but the accuracy
is low and it is replete with whipsaws. Our purpose as traders is to bypass as much of this as
possible and I know of no better way than with the setups, thinking and common sense.

18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE WITH 2 OUTSIDE BARS 10 YEAR RESULTS

COPPER        29.2 (THOUSANDS)

S FRANC       48.9                           ,        .

B POUND132.9             ·                    ^ .:···.;
                                             . - "\"'r ' I
CORN · - · · . 35.8      ..,..· J· · ' .
                         ''' V ^ 'A
GOLD          83.4                           ;vi-\.;  ' ''../''.

JYEN          147.5      \: 'J \ ·                    ·           \.

COFFEE        188.0         · \ ,,

HOIL          30.2                        A

BEANS         87.9       v

                            17
EURO     30.5                                                   " '·'      /; "
SUGAR                                                                          ^'
WHEAT    96.0
DMARK
T BONDS  41.5

         79.1 r

         44.8 · . ·                                                    /

3.) QUALIFIED TREND LINE BREAK ENTRY

This is a steal from Tom DeMark, my trading buddy of more than 25 years. Tom has come up
with many novel trading ideas and way of looking at market movement, as most of you know.

A few years ago Tom told me how to tell if a trend line breakout would succeed or not. The idea

Tom shared with me is that if the day before the expected trend like break (to the upside for a

buy signal, reveres it for a sell) has an up close the breakout is suspect. Exceptions would be

inside days following down close days and up days that close below the opening, those days

would not disqualify taking a trade.                                                         ;_. ; ... > \.

Tom has added that gapping above the trend line, even if the upclose days were present, is ok for
entry. Tom does like to see such a gap move up from the opening a few ticks to confirm
The buy, down a few ticks to confirm a sell.

4.) A NEW INDICATOR PRO-GO                                             -.  "' ' .- - .. - ·  '?*'·,..-:.'-*,
         TM^^TM"TM"""^^ --·--··"^--' m-- '""" TM" ~" ^-TM-- --

Many, many years ago I wrote about how to separate public buying from professional buying.
The essence of the technique was to create an A/D line for the public that shows the change from
yesterdays close to today's open. The professional A/D line is then constructed by using the
change from today's open to today's close. Those two lines clearly "tip" us as to what is really

We can take this one step farther by simply constructing an index of the previous close to open

+/- values and then taking a 14 day average which is plotted against a 14 day average of the +/-

values of the open to close.                                                       ·

I can see at least two ways to use this data, and there may be more. The first is to simply look
for divergences between price and the Professional index. Price lows not matched by the Pro
index are bullish. New highs not matched by this index tend to be bearish. \ -:-,,-,

Additionally, crossings of these two indicators have given some excellent intermediate, term buy
and sell signal as the charts below depict. This can be used as an entry or timing technique wim
the rules as provided at the seminar.

See Pages 93 Through 100

                                                                18
5.) THE FAILURE DAY FAMILY
The market loves to catch people by surprise. Never forget that statement. The following
patterns can be used to enter the market taking advantage of what looks like a strong ma:;-:c:
move. The underlying truth of these patterns is that the day after the pattern prices do e,-_,.._,; T ..--
opposite what "the crowd" was expecting.
FAKE OUT DAY--Here we have a higher high, higher low and lower close than the prior aay -
for a buy. The sell is just the opposite, a lower -high and low with a higher close. Buy/Sell at the
prior days high/low.

SMASH DAY--This is a bit like a fakeout day. The pattern to look for is a day with a higher
high, low and higher close. BUT, the close is substantially below the open. Taking out this day
high is very bullish. The sell is just the opposite, a down close substantially above the open, with
a sell at that day's low tomorrow.

                                                    19
NAKED CLOSE DAYS--This is a nice term coined by Joe Stowell. It's easy to spot, a naked
close "buy set up" requires a close lower than yesterdays low, buy at the high of this down close.
A "sell set up" requires a close above yesterdays high, sell at the low of this up close.

SPECIALISTS TRAP - For a sell look for a strong uptrending market that goes into a trading

range or "box" for 6 to 20 days, then thrusts up on big breakout day. It may go on, or it may not.

Our sell will be at the true low of the break out day. If prices are in a down trend and go into that

box the reverse of the above, buy long at the high of the breakdown day.                               ,

                                      WHEN TO EXIT

Well, let's see, we've narrowed down the markets we will trade for big moves and have also
determined our buy and sell points. All that's left is to tell how to get out of the trade.

                                                      20
1.) MY LEAST FAVORITE EXIT TECHNIQUE        y

I hate this exit technique, but it is the most important on in the world. What it is, is simply u
dollar stop. While this is not fancy it's protection and that's what we all need. The amount YOU :
are willing to lose on a trade is dependent upon three things, 1. Your belief in the trade 2. -... ,,--
size of your bankroll and 3. The volatility of the market.

I believe all these trades will work, but know some won't ...this means I cannot fall in love or
marry a position, some of them will not work out...the sooner your accept that hard dose of
reality the better your trading will become.

These major mega trades we are looking for have often made $5,000 to $10,000 a contract so I'm
willing to use a stop of about $ 1,500 as final proof I am wrong. Smaller traders may want to risk
less, but the closer your stop is the greater the probability that you will be stopped out just before
the big move begins. Each of us must ultimately decide how much we want to lose.

I will also protect against loss by a rally to new highs if short, new lows if long. This does not
mean I'm through with it...I'll be back on the next buy/sell...if the conditions are still there.

2.) THE AMAZING 3 BAR ENTRY/EXIT TECHNIQUE

This is one of the very best trading techniques I have ever developed. It is really quite simple,
once the market is in a run away move, as I call it a "Rock and Roll" market - then and only
then--do we use this entry. Price must be out of a trading range. ,

If so, and we are long, determine the highest close in the up move so far. Count that as day one
and go back to get two more days. None of these can be an inside day. Once all three days have
been noted, then determine the lowest true low of those three days. Place your stop to exit (sell
short?) at that price. . ·, , . , ., . . .

If short determine the lowest close in the down move so far. Count that as day one and go back
to get two more days. None of these can be an inside day. Once you have all three days note the
highest true high. Place your stop to exit (buy long?) at that price.

AN INPROVEMENT?? In recent years I have noted this; in the buy example, if the day

before the low close was an up close then go back one more day, and again use no inside
days. If the high close, in a sell example, has a down close the day before, go back ~"tt *"«»-o

day. Again use no inside days.

See Pages 101 Through 103

                           21
.V, ·>·  EXTRA EXIT/ENTRY TECHNIQUES

If I'm not stopped out the only other thing that can happen is to take a profit! I will use o-- ... ..-
following techniques to exit;

1.) STOCHASTICS...I will be very tempted to take profits when the slow % D hits 75% i: s^_
long, 25% if short. If the market is trending quite strongly I may wait for a crossover of D
and %K, and again, I'm using the 14 bar weekly series. This may get me out too early, but
there's little perfection in this business.

2.) 3 BAR...I also use the 3 bar exit technique...as discussed earlier in this presentation. This is

an excellent technique to use when a market goes in a tight trend move. IN FACT, THIS IS

THE BEST TRAILING STOP TECHNIQUE I KNOW OF TO HOLD ON TO ONE OF THESE

TIGER MOVES...IN AN UP OR DOWN MARKET.                              s .,,

3.) THE 18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE...You can use the 18 bar moving averages as an exit

technique. This works well for holding onto long term trend moves.  ·      - .,

4.) CHANNEL BREAKS...If all else fails, I will exit at the highest high of the last 20 days if
short, lowest low of the last 20 days of long.

No one has perfected long term trading. If so we would see funds with more consistent results.
But there is big, and relatively easy, money to be made by locating markets that make major
highs and lows, getting aboard and staying with them as long as possible.

5.) TARGET SHOOTER...Finally, don't forget to use our handy dandy target shooter to
determine levels were price should go and bounce.

See Pages 105 Throng h i D <

  ,.,-.;'./& ,vv,.^ ·: ADDITIONAL COMMENTS ,; ;',A;,\,- ':-:.:·'. --^

                         THE "CROUCH" VERSION TWO-WITH PRICE

      THE SECRET TO THE INTERNAL TRIANGLE, OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT

Chartists have long been fascinated with chart pattern such as the 5 point reversal or exDanams
wedge first written about by a fellow named Wetzel in the 1920's then popularized by C^.I_, ,,.
1935, only to be picked up by Edward and McGee, then re-popularized by Wilder in the i?ou s > ;

Price seems to "crouch" down into a formation then spring into a major move. The prco;c~. ;D
the more you study these patterns the more confused on can become. Curtis Arnold was the first
person to mechanize and prove there are profits* in these configurations with his PPS systems
(phone 407-747-1554) for more information.

                              22
My twist to all this has been to identify two crouch patterns we can trade and establish some
rules, especially rules for when the patterns change mid stream, which they often do.
Let's start with the traditional Triangle. Schabacker called these coils, Gartley coined the woiu
triangle and identified that there must be four points of contact with point one starting af::r -·"··:
he called the mark-up move. He also went to the heart of the problem saying, "...triangles z-znzTM
as continuation patterns, as wells as reversal patterns."!
What I have noticed is that there must be two lower highs and two higher lows to establish the
possibility of a triangle and that the expected move will be in the direction of the mark-up move
(These swing points or triangle points should have 3-6 days on both sides to be valid). In other
words the move that created point one is the most likely move to develop. Now lets' look at a
chart to establish our references as I have identified them. ALSO NOTICE WHERE THE STOP
POINT CAN BE A VALUABLE CONTRIBUTION FROM ARNOLD.
The problem comes false breakouts. Can this inherent problem be overcome? I think so by
waiting for a close that is above the last triangle point if buying or below the last triangle valley
if selling. By doing this, should a new triangle develop, we will be able to reconstruct the next
triangle within the even larger triangle and take appropriate action. Hopefully the following
diagram will show you how this develops. The key to this pattern is to keep in mind you must
have two lower highs with a low point in between that is greater than the previous low if selling.
For buying you need two higher lows with a high point in between that is less than the previous
high. The triangles shown may help you get the point.

                                                    STOP

                                                     23
                                CONGESTION BREAKOUT TRADING

                                   MY 8 WEEK BOX APPROACH

       Major market moves frequently come out of congestion ranges. Here's how to spoz --
and trade these set-ups.

About one third of the time a market will trend, the other two thirds it's in congestion zones,
backing and filling almost with a mind of its' own to find stops, punish or frazzle traders
endurance. Then, low and behold, one day it rips out of the congestion zone leaving most
traders on the sidelines nursing their wounds, cursing their "luck".

SPRINGING THE CONGESTION TRAP IN YOUR FAVOR...Instead of getting caught in
these traps let's turn them to our advantage! The way to do it is to scan through your charts
looking for any market that has been in a sideways move for at least 8 weeks. A further
"definition" that may help is that it has been at least 8 weeks since a new rally high or low has
been seen.

Isolate the 8 weeks and identify what the major trend move was coming into that 8-week box
and expect a break out in the same direction. But, keep in mind that 12 weeks later you have a
new 8-week box and the major swing direction may have changed. In any event, mark off the
major trend lines in this box. Our wager is price will smash out of these trend lines. Our game
is one of waiting for these congestion ranges to set up before we get involved. . . this is a
waiting game.. .if you can't wait don't play.

Our timing indication of this can come in many ways. Some of the better are extreme
Commercial Public readings, VAN-DIV set ups, DMI loss of trend integrity, 3 point trend line
break outs Pro/Go, seasonal indications and all the other tricks of our trades. I also use Tom
Demarks' qualified trend line entry technique.

                    . .. AND HERE'S THE SECRET.. .KEEP SWINGING. . .

OK, you've been patient got into the congestion on a breakout up or down on the assumption
this should catapult the market. Hopefully it will. But, happy camper that you are, don't
become complacent. . .it may well be a false breakout.

Which means you need to keep a new 8-week box and take opposite breakout signals untii one ^
of them is the big one.
Clearly this means you may be whipped around a little, my guess is 1/3 of these initial signcu:; --
will be wrong and you will be stuck in the mud with other traders. BUT, you got in later
you know one of these days it will break out and more importantly--YOU DON'T CARE
WHICH WAY IT ULTIMATELY BREAKS OUT--in fact you must trade these congestions
with 1) no predetermined belief 2) the conviction and bankroll to take all breakouts until the big

                                                      24
 one bites your bait, knowing you may loose a few lures first. That is your cost of doing
 business.
 If you cannot stay the course do not take these trades. If you can, you will catch some of the
 biggest moves on the year.

                                           ENTRY TECHNIQUES
Here are other approaches I use:
Short term swing points.. .1 will buy/sell at the penetration of the last short-term trend point as
shown below. But again, keep in mind there must first be a set up of some sort, I will not take
just any reversal.

Volatility breakouts. . Generally speaking. . When the market is "primed" I will buy at the open
the next day +100% of the previous days range. This can be a smaller figure for some markets,
buy year in and year out it has been very good.

                                                                       Buy X'/,

                                                      y ·/.

                                                       25
       STOCHASTICS...THE MOST OVER-RATED TOOL OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
 I am not much of a fan of oscillators of any sort. They are dangerous, they are treacherous, yet
 there is a place for them when used selectively, and here that place is;

 1.) TREND TRADING WITH AN OSCILLATOR
What I'm about to show you works well with any of the standard oscillators. It is to simply buy
 when the index gets above 60%, sell when it falls below 40%. This is a good entry tool when
rest of our "work" tells us a top or bottom is at hand. It waits until the turn is made, but not too
long, and will keep us in for a long term trade should that develop.
2.) VANDIV...The divergence signals that really works
Nick Van Nice showed me this excellent divergent pattern that can be used on short or long-term
data. It is a new concept so I will go slowly. A buy is established when price makes a higher
low than the previous one, yet the oscillator makes a lower low. The reverse is true for a sell.
Price will make a lower high, while the oscillator makes a higher high. I'm showing the basic
pattern to look for and then actual examples.

                          BULL MARKETS AND THEIR DIFFERENCES
Not all bull and bear markets are the same. A commercially driven bull market will have fe-.v
'pullbacks, and those will be short in time and price. Speculative bull markets will have maj :r
swings, up and down, along the way. They are not buy and hold markets as are the commercials.
The way to tell the difference is the tight commercial markets will have a premium, and or
DMI will be rising as price rises, there will be Accumulation Line divergence's in speculative
bull markets at intermediate term highs and lows. The big "key" is the lack of pullbacks of any

                                                       26
size if that's taking place you know you are in a commercially driven bull market. One should
also monitor the commercial long/short position as well.

                                    MY INSIGHT INTO CYCLES

Traditionally, chartists look for cycles in time, 30 days from low to low, etc. While these cycl. _
do exist, the ones I prefer have nothing to do with time. They are as follows, and will help you
determine the future direction of price.

HIGH/LOW CLOSE CYCLE...As price begins to decline the closes are in the upper half of
the range, right at, or near the low, the close is at or near the low of the day. Then, as price rallies
the close "creeps" closer to the high of the day until it closes at or about the high, at which point
the up swing is about over. Also note large range up days or weeks don't dip much below the
opening, large range down days do not rally much above the opening.

RANGE CYCLE...There is a natural cycle on going from small ranges for a few days to large
ranges, back to small ranges. Short term traders want to await small ranges, take a position, exit
with profits on large ranges, then stand aside until small ranges again appear.

TRADING RANGE TO TREND... As above, prices spend a good deal of time in trading
ranges...then have run ups or downs and go back into trading ranges. Trend runs "suck" in
traders, when what we should await are trading ranges as they "produce" the trend swings we
need.

                 MONEY MANAGEMENT . . . THE KEY TO THE KINGDOM

All the hot systems and wining trades in the world will not Create massive wealth on their own.
It is the ability to parlay winnings that creates fortunes.

The way I traded $10,000 to $1,1000,000 in 12 months was mostly due to money management,
not arcane markets secrets.

The secret to it all is that as soon as you have made more money you must increase your number
of contracts based on the new equity. As soon as you loose you must cut back on the number of
contracts.

YOU'LL NEVER LEARN TO FLY UNTIL YOU LEARN TO FALL...

There are several formulas you can use. The simplest is to take the margin required to trade. ,,.__
a systems drawdown and trade one contract for that amount of money. Once you make that
much money, start trading two contracts, then three, etc., if you loose that much then cut bacK
one contract, and on and on it goes.
The problem with all this is after a big string of wins you will have way too large a position on
for the inevitable loss and as you have a string of losses and have been cutting back you will not
have enough contracts at the start of the equally inevitable wining streak.

A solution to this has been answered by ULTIMANAGER, software developed by Mark Thorn
now available from Genesis Data 1-800-808-3282 that allows you to test just about any
combination of money management as well as various elements of your system, like entries,

exits, stops and the like.

                                     ...

One of Ryan Jones solutions is to not increase and decrease the number of contracts at the same
rate. As an example if you increase one contract for every $10,000 gained you might decrease
one contract for every $5,000 lost. This protects your winnings. Now the problem is if you
follow an equity dip you increase at the old rate of one contract per $10,000 it may be pretty
slow going. So, Ryan suggests increasing, once you have turned the corner and are making

money again. The obvious solution is, once you have a win to increase now by the same

amount you decreased until you get back to the old equity high, then go back to the original
game plan, increasing by the $ 10,000 amount instead of the $5,000.

ON THE END OF A LIMB AND SAWING IT OFF

The problem with and optimal F approach or fixed fraction of your account is that once you get
on a roll you roll too fast. Let me prove my point; if your average win/loss trade is $200 and you
have 10 trades per month and you will increase on contract at every $10,000 of profits it will
take you 50 trades or 5 months to add that first additional contract. Then only 2.5 months to for
from 2 to 3, about 7 weeks to boost it up to 4 contracts, 5 weeks to jump to 5, one month to 6, 25
days takes you to 7, 21 days to 8 contracts... 18 days later you are at 9 and 16.5 days trading a 10
lot.

Then disaster strikes, as it surely must. You have now scooted out on the end of a limb and are
sitting there with lots of contracts on while the limb snaps when you have a large losing trade,
one 3 times the average of $200 or $600 per contract times the 10 lot so you just dropped $6,000,
you have not given back $ 10.000 yet so you trade a 10 lot on the next trade and lose another
$6,000. Now in two trades you are down 12,000 of from your equity high at $100,000.

The next trade is also a loser. 3 in a row, for the average of $200 x the 9 lot you are now trading
and you get tagged for another $1800 let's call it $2,000 so you are now down $14,000.

Meanwhile a "smarter" trader decreases faster than you, cutting back two contract for every
$5,000 lost, so on the first hit he/she is back to 8 contracts, losing only $2,400, side steppine ,;
another $6,000 hit...and on it goes.

AND IT CAN GET WORSE BY FAR....

Let's take a winning system. It wins 55% of the time and you decide to trade 25% of your bank
roll, starting at $25,000, on each trade. Wins are equal to losses at $1,000 each. Here's the way
the trades played out;

                                 28
$20,000 *.25 = 6 contracts on the first trade margin is always $1,000 in this example

1. -6,000     15,000
2 . -3,000    12,000
3. -3,000      9,000
4. +2,000      11,000
5. -2,000
6. -2,000       9,000
7. +2,000       7,000
8. +2,000      9,000
9. +3,000     11,000
10. +3,000    14,000
11. +4,000    17,000
              21,000

You made $1,000 yet had a 65% drawdown while a single contract trader would have dipped to
$16,000 a 20% drawdown!

Let's look at another scenario where we hit it right from the get go winning 5 of 8 trades, a great
deal, right?

1. +5,000 '   25,000

2. +6,000     31,000

3. +7,000     38,000

4. +9,000 · 47,000                ..'.'..'.

5. +11,000    , 58,000 (WOW)

6. -14,000 .  44,000              v          ;

7. -11,000    33,000

8. -16,000    13,000 WHAT??

Look at this...5 winners, 3 losers and you are down. How can this be, well it's a combination of
two things, one the money management that got you to the $58,000 also brought you down.
Plus, I threw in a kicker, the last trade was just like what the market gives us all the time, a loss 2
times greater than the average loss. Had it been the traditional loss your account would be at
$26,000. The smart trader who cut back twice the amount after the first loss would have lost
$5,000 on trade 7, taking him to $29,000 and -$8,000 on the double hit on trade #8 to show a net
of $31,000!

              MONEY MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES

The easy way is to buy the software Mark sells for optimal trading results for any system, or
combination, call for details. A bootstrap approach would be to first determine the pain you are
willing to sit through... how much equity dip you will endure. Let's say you have $50,000 and
will risk a 40% dip (you can vary this to suit your fancy).

                              29
For years we have looked for the fastest way to get to the end of the game. What I have learned
is that this is certainly the riskiest, and more importantly correct money management should be
about you and your comfort levels not maximizing gains.

If you divided this amount, $20,000, by the drawdown of the system, lets say that's $5,000 so
you can trade four contracts and sleep at nights. That would be your starting point.

Now, when do you increase and decrease? The kicker is the largest losing trade--it will come
back to bit you again--and sooner rather than later, so we need some protection. If our largest
loss is, say, $3,000, this one trade, one contract can cause a 15% reduction of our $20,000 at 5
contracts that's a $15,000 hit, consuming almost all of our equity dip cushion.

If money management is our only defense in this risky game, what type of shield can we employ
to protect us from the largest loss?

In private talks with Ralph Vince I learned that there are several things one can do . Ralph likes
the idea of dividing the Kelley number into the largest loss to tell how much money one needs to
increase and decrease contracts by. By and large the Kelley ratio number will usually come in at
.30 so we will use that for all systems. If my largest loss is $2,5007.30 means I need to make
$8,333 to bump up to an additional contract.

This seerns high to me, I might require just two times the largess loss generated in new profits to
trade an additional contract. In this case that's $5,000. Where the "truth" is no one knows at this
time but we are in the ballpark here by basing our ups and downs on the key ingredients of the
system, not just % accuracy and risk/reward ratio as Kelley does. Both Ralph and I feel you
need to make more than 100% of the largest loss before you can increase contracts. He may
have hit the nail on the head with Kelley relationship, it certainly is adaptable to all systems.
(You may also consider dividing largest loss by Kelley, in our example above that's $8,333 and
then dividing this in the he maximum equity dip you want, in the example above that's
$20,000/$8,333 telling us you can trade 2.4 contracts on your $50,000 account. Once you make
$8,000 you will trade one more contract. An even more conservative approach would be to take
40% of the new equity, 58,000 *.40/8,333 which tells us we can now trade 2.7 contracts. This is
probably the safest way to use these numbers).

I hope you get the point.. .this is not the perfect scenario but it gives you room to create a money
management program for you and your system...strategy will vary not only from system to
system but also from person to person and now you can tailor your system to your comfort
levels.

PROOF IS IN THE PUDDING...Now let's take a look at what happens when we employ si--
an approach in trading. We'll use a very simple system that buys on the opening every Monaav
if that opening is less than Fridays close. Our exit is standard Bail Out with a $ 1,750 stop.
Trading just one contract on all signals makes $79,200 with 69% accuracy and a risk reward
ratio of .81. That's the first clip.

                                                                  30
The Kelley formula gives us a number of about .30 so that divided into max loss of 1,800 tells us
we can "re-up" every $6,000. I stopped trading at 100 contracts. The next clip shows these
results...$868,875 of profits, over 10 times more dollars gained. It took from 1/190 to get to in
contracts. I stopped there and started over. They system has just now stepped up to 2 contra-.-.^

(12/20/96). Staying fixed at 100 contracts trading up till now would have been an equity dip j
$763,725 while one lot trading has made $11,850!!

I I I I ! I l l I I 1 1 1 I I III I I I I 1 1 1 1 1 1 I I 1 1 1 Hill A L L TRADES - Test 1 \ \ V \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \

Total net profit          $79,200.00        Gross loss               $-95,400.00
Gross profit             $174,600.00

Total # of trades        172                Percent profitable       69%
                                                                     53
Number winning trades    119                Number losing trades

Largest winning trade    $6,375.00          Largest losing trade     $-1,800.00
Average winning trade    $1,467.23          Average losing trade     $-1,800.00
Ratio avg win/avg loss                      Avg trade (win & loss)
                               0.81                                    $460.47

Max consecutive winners  15                 Max consecutive losers   5

Ave. #bars in winners    1                  Avg. #bars in losers     0

Max closed-out drawdown  $-10,400.00        Max intra-day drawdawn   $-10,400.00
Profit factor                     1.83      Max # of contracts held            1
Account size required                       Return on account
                          $30,400.00                                        260%

/ / Illllllllll Illllll I I III 1 1 1 I I I I I III I I A L L TRADES - Test 1 \ \ U \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ U \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \

Total net profit          $868,875.00       Gross loss               1625,400.00
Gross profit             $2494,275.00

Total # of trades        138                Percent profitable       74%

Number winning trades    103                Number losing trades     35

Largest winning trade    $260,000.00        Largest losing trade     -180,000.00
Average winning trade     $24,216.26        Average losing trade
Ratio avg win/avg loss            0.52      Avg trade (win & loss)   $-46,440.00
                                                                       $6,296.20

Max consecutive winners  15                 Max consecutive losers       3

Ave. #bars in winners    1                  Avg. #bars in losers         0

Max closed-out drawdown  -360,000.00        Max intra-day drawdawn   -386,250.00
Profit factor                     1.53      Max # of contracts held        100
Account size required                       Return on account               36%
                         2386,250.00

                                        31
              HOW TO DESIGN YOUR MONEY MANAGEMENT STRATEGY

 Thanks to Mark Thorn, there now exists software that will tell you everything you ever wanted
 to know about how to best manage the dollar behind your system.

 His software allows you to just about any possible scheme of money management--and rr_:r~ _
 importantly--also enables you to also note which parts or rules of your systems are the mcc; =;
 efficient.

 Of all the tests I have run, and we are talking thousands here, the simplest for the average guy or
 gal in the street is presented here;

                        TAKE 20% OF YOUR ACCOUNT EQUITY AND
                          DIVIDE THIS BY THE LARGEST LOSS YOU
                          WILL ACCEPT OR YOUR SYSTEM ALLOWS

If your account balance is $20,000, we know the 20% figure is $4,000. Divide this by the largest
loss, let's say $1,000. which means you would trade 4 contracts. As your account balance moves
up and down so will the number of contracts you will trade.

This is the formula my 16-year-old daughter used to take $10,000 to $100,000 in 1997. Need I
say more? Yes, traders would do better if they spent more time on this aspect of speculation, and
less on buy/sell signals. Money management makes fortunes- - -not systems. This is the most
important data presented to my Inner Circle members.

What do you think...has this lesson in money management been worthwhile???

  INSIDE CIRCLE SHORT TERM TRADING APPROACH

Short term trading is a complex and confusing business. A traders mind and ego are constantly
butted about by reality. That reality collision is the result of hopes and predictions of how life
should be running into how life is.

The problem will always exist, in my opinion, as a great deal of market activity, the gyrations of
the dance are totally random. Yes, totally.

Sure, the beat is there but the cacophony is more chaotic than a pack of whirling dervishes, oo 4,
what are we to do, give up ship? No way, this is too much fun to play. But it is the playin^ -;---TM
gets us into trouble, hence I suggest you keep this adage in mind;

                                                          32
It is far better to be on the ground wishing you
                    were flying...

Than to be in the air wishing you were on
                   the ground

BACK TO BASICS--Short term trading, as I see it, is very similar to long term trading.
What's needed is a basis to operate upon, an advantage, a bias or a tipping of the scales. There
are may ways we can gain an advantage in the game, so let's begin at that point. ..establishing a
bias...then developing trading rules around a known and provable condition that is the cause of
market moves, not a consequence of them.

There are several such advantages we can use in trading U.S. Bonds, among the best are;

1. Trade Day of the Week
2. Trade Day of the Month
3. National Holidays
4. The Power to Gold
5. Specific Price Patterns

1.) TRADE DAY OF THE WEEK--The following table reflects buying on the opening
of each trading day of the week and exiting on the first profitable opening. Note it is clear that
some days are not so good, by an large, for trading

DAY OF WEEK  +/-$ PROFITS      % WINS  AVERAGE $ TRADE

MONDAY         41,568             79           83
TUESDAY        32,951             76           73
WEDNESDAY     -18,615             73          -37
THURSDAY      -13,108       . 70              -26
FRIDAY         14,426             73           30

There are 52 Monday opportunities a year for trading, 52 Tuesdays and 52 Fridays giving us a
total of 156 potential trades. Maybe we should just feast, upon these!

2.) TRADE DAYS OF THE MONTH AS WELL-The same bias or advantage car. rr

garnered from TDOM's. The first table list buying on the opening of every TDOM, the seccnc
only buying if Gold has closed lower than 25 days ago. Clearly there is a difference, clear;-; ^
short term trader should be alerted to these set up opportunities.

                            33
TDOM $+/-     %Wins  Avg Profit        TDOM $+/-  %Wins  Avg Profit

 1 18,827       68%    72              1 15,507   70%        100
                58%  -107                          57%       ----- -
2 -22,641       56%  -159              2 -19,711  57%        _._.
                60%   -71                         60%
3 -41,047       67%                    3 -22,158  70%         -w /
                61%    23                         62%          83
4 -18,547       60%  -109              4 10,457   61%         -42
                69%   -72                         64%         -42
5   6046        69%   114              5 12,500   71%          43
                68%                               67%        126
6 -28,297       63%    68 '            6 -6060    69%          57
                62%    27                         64%         36
7 -18,797       63%    53              7 -6271    64%         -24
                61%   -62                         63%          11
8 29,608        68%   -42              8 6153     70%        -52
                65%   -78                         69%          5
9 17,640        65%   139              9 18,603   68%         10
                67%   -29                         67%         29
10  7015        67%   -13              10  8740   68%         10
                65%    15                         61%         25
11 -14,422      68%   -18              11  5370   72%        -37
                67%    46                         76%        120
12 -16,047      73%    30              12 -3791   85%        162
                       31                                   343
13 -11,016            169              13  1670

14 -20,096                             14 -7740

15  353                                15  808

16 -7430                               16  1545

17 -3430                               17  4605

18  3822                               18  1406

19  -4401                              19  3610

20  9166                               20 -4628

21  4531                               21 10,856

22  2842                               22  8298

23  3902                               23  4807

3.) NATIONAL HOLIDAYS-There has been a clear-cut advantage to trading around the
national holidays every year. Why I am not sure, but since I was first alerted to this in 1962 anr
have seen it hold up--in real time trading--ever since, I'm trading these biases as well.

The results are quite good. The next tabulation reflects the trading strategy I will teach. These -
results are from 1978 forward, use a $1,400 stop and exit on the first profitable opening. The
$50,956 of profits with a drawdown of only $ 1,978 is among the best I have ever seen. We omv
have 8 holidays a year, but they are dandies, netting a trader, on average, $2,500 + a year. If
that doesn't sound like much keep in mind that's about an 80% a year gain with only 16 trading
days of "exposure" per year.

The rules below show the holiday and how many days before the holiday to take action as wel_
as the best strategy, buying or selling on the open or the close.

HOLIDAY_________DAYS BEFORE                OPEN OR CLOSE ENTRY
                                           TD Before Holiday
NEW YEARS DAY        Sell Close Third      TD Before Holiday
                                           TD Before Holiday
PRESIDENTS DAY       Buy Close Fifth       TD Before Holiday
                                           TD Before Holiday
                     Sell Open First

EASTER *             Sell Close First

MEMORIAL DAY         Buy Open Fourth

                                       34
INDEPENDENCE DAY         Buy Open Fifth     TD Before Holiday
                         Sell Open First    TD After Holiday
LABOR DAY                Buy Close Third    TD Before Holiday
THANKSGIVING DAY         Buy Close Fourth   TD Before Holiday
                         Sell Close Sixth   TD Before Holiday
CHRISTMAS DAY            Buy Open Second    TD Before Holiday

EXPLANATION--As an example, the trade for New Years is to sell on the close of the marKet

three days before the holiday. Keep in mind "0" means the day before the actual holiday. For
Easter, sell on the close of the day before the holiday. For Thanksgiving buy the close on the 4th

day before the holiday.

Data              : DAY T-BONDS
Calc Dates        : 01/10/78 - 07/06/99

//////////////////////////// ALL TRADES - Test 1 \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\

Total net profit         $52,200.00         Gross loss -               $-15,742.50
Gross profit             $67,942.50

Total # of trades                190        Percent profitable         84%
Number winning trades                                                    29
                                 161        Number losing trades

Largest winning trade    $2,986.25          Largest losing trade       $-1,451.25
Average winning trade       $422.00         Average losing trade          $ -542.84
Ratio avg win/avg loss           0.77       Avg trade (win & loss)             $274.74

Max consecutive winners          20         Max consecutive losers     2

Avg # bars in winners            1          Avg # bars in losers       .2

Max closed-out drawdown $-1,978.75          Max intra-day drawdown $ - 1 , 9 7 8 . 7 5

Profit factor                    4.31       Max # of contracts held    1

Account size required    $4,978.75          Return on account          1,048%

4.) THE POWER OF GOLD-Gold, or at least the trend of Gold, has a powerful effect on
Bond prices. Not always, but often enough that it should be used to further develop the hot hand
we are wishing to construct. I do not want to trade every day, only days that have the odds
heavily in my favor. The trend of Gold does that. If we do this same study above but buy require
that the closing price of Gold be less than 25 days ago we notice the following results;

DAY OF WEEK              +/- $ PROFITS      %WINS $ +/-AV. TRADE

MONDAY                   25,883             84                    187
TUESDAY                  31,168
WEDNESDAY                                   82                  222
THURSDAY                  1,037
FRIDAY                    8,825             74                      7
                         22,075
                                            76                    53

                                            81                    133

5.) SPECIFIC PRICE PATTERNS-It's time to get down to the business of trading
what follows are simple signals and patterns based on the above advantages we have been able
to uncover in the art of trading;

                                        35
         1. CONSECUTIVE DOWN CLOSES

A. When there are two consecutive down closes AND the distance from today's true high to
today's close is less than that same value from yesterday THEN buy tomorrow at the open pku
that value, today's high - today'slSw IF today's close is greater than the close 30 days ago. (this
is even better if gold closes lower than the previous day)

B. When there are three consecutive days with lower closes than the prior day
AND the distance from today's high to today's close is less than that same value from the prior
day, THEN buy tomorrow at the open plus today's high- today's close.

                                                     I
          2. GAP DOWN CLOSES

                            F

A. If today's high is less, below, yesterdays low (a gap down) and the open tomorrow is above
today's low but less than yesterdays low THEN buy tomorrow at the open plus whichever
amount is less; today's high minus today's close or today's open minus today's low.

B. If today's high is less than yesterdays low and Gold has closed lower than the close of Gold
15 or 24 days ago THEN buy tomorrow at the open plus today's high minus today's close.

         3. FRIDAY SET UP TRADES FOR MONDAY

The first requirement for all of the following trades is that close today is Friday.

A. If Mondays open is equal to or greater than Fridays low and less than or equal Fridays close
    THEN buy tomorrow at the open plus 20% of Fridays range on a stop.

B. Fridays high is greater than or equal to Thursdays close and Mondays open is below Fridays
    low then buy Monday at Fridays low on a stop. (OOPS!)

C. Fridays low is less than or equal Thursdays close and both Friday and Thursday are up closes
    (> than prior day close to close) AND open Monday is above Fridays high, buy on the open.

D. IF Thursday is not an inside day AND Gold closes lower on Friday than it did 20 days ago
    and Fridays low in Bonds is <= Thursdays close and the filter (H-C of Friday is less than H-
    C of Thursday) AND the open Monday is below Fridays high, THEN buy Monday at the
    open plus 15% of Fridays range.

E. Friday is an inside day with a down close and Thursday was an up close if so and

      1. Tomorrows open is greater than Fridays high buy the market.
     2. Tomorrows open is>= Fridays close and < Fridays high buy at Fridays high stop.
      3. Tomorrows open is >= Fridays low and < Fridays close but at Fridays close stop.
     4. Tomorrows open is < Fridays low > Thursdays low buy at Fridays lows on a stop.

                                                       36
4. HIDDEN OOPS! TRADES

For these trades we use the projected high/low formula which is; (high + low + close)/3 *2. ----
Subtract the high to arrive at the projected low, subtract the low to arrive at the projected h_--..

A. If today is a down close and today is Monday or Friday AND Gold is lower than 19 day" "~~
    AND today's close is the lowest close of the last 8,10 or 12 days ago AND the open
    tomorrow is greater than the projected low THEN buy tomorrow on the open.

B. If today is Friday and the open tomorrow is below the projected low then buy tomorrow a the
    projected low on a stop. EXCEPTION IF FRIDAY IS AN INSIDE DAY and Mondays
    opening is below the projected low, THEN buy at the PROJECTED HIGH on a stop.

C. If today is Monday, Thursday or Friday and Gold closes less than 6 OR 25 days ago and the
    open tomorrow is below the PROJECTED HIGH THEN buy tomorrow at the projected high
    on a stop.

Well there you have it, a simple way to trade the bonds that does not have you all worked up
about every tick or e very day of the week. But does it trade enough to keep you happy? I
should think so as it trades almost once a week, but then again.. .you guys and gals sure do like
to trade.

Couple these with the Holiday trades and you should have plenty of opportunities for profits
which have averaged about $8,000 a year with a trade about every 7 market days. On your own
you can build trading models and make trading decisions. For the best implementation of your
signals I suggest closely watching the direction of Gold, Trade Day of Week and TDOM. By
and large a 30% volatility expansion works well in this market as well.

After all these years of frustration as a trader I would advise you that I think it is best to trade
with a bias or approach, such as above, but not locked into a totally mechanical mode. Use the
knowledge we have of market biases to make your trades more profitable.

Data               DAY T-BONDS           67/99
Calc Dates
                   01/01/90 - 07/06/99

I!11111II111111111111!111111 ALL TRADES - Test 1 \\X\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\

Total net profit          $72,550.00                             $-32 ,120 . 0'""'
Gross profit             $104,670.00 . Gross loss

Total # of trades               285      Percent profitable       87%

Number winning trades           249      Number losing trades     36

Largest winning trade    $1,705.00       Largest losing trade     $-1,451.2-
Average winning trade       $420.36      Average losing trade      $ -892.2::
Ratio avg win/avg loss            0.47   Avg trade (win & loss)
                                                                        $254.5

Max consecutive winners         27       Max consecutive losers   3

Avg # bars in winners           1        Avg # bars in losers     2

Max closed-out drawdown  $-4,543.75      Max intra-day drawdown   $-5,252.50
Profit factor                      3.25  Max # of contracts held            1
Account size required                    Return on account
                          $8,262.50                                      878%

                                         37
           S &P 500 TRADING RULES

TRADE DAY OF THE WEEK

As with bonds, TDW, TDOM reveal a great deal to the short term trader The first table reflects
buying on the opening and exiting on the first profitable close with a $3,500 stop for every day
of the week

MONDAY     $169,810     71%          $230
TUESDAY       39.927    65
WEDNESDAY               65 .         50     ·
THURSDAY   - 33,842     65
FRIDAY       30,592     63           -39

           - 34,665                  35

                                     -40

TRADE DAY OF THE MONTH

Some times of the month are better than others for buying or selling as our next table exhibits.
Here you see each TDOM with our bail out and $3,500 stop.

           TDOM $+/-             %Wins      A vg Profit

              1            4175      64%         20
                          -5505      66%         -27
               2          -5970      61%         -29
               3         16,867      67%         83
               4        -31,490      64%       -155
               5          -4412      62% -       -21
               6         14,170      70%         69
               7          -7947      68%         -39
               8        -16,210      62%         -79
               9        48,202       69%        237
               10       -10,535      60%         -51
               11       12,262       68%         60
               12       54,505       65%        268
               13        -7282       61%        -35
               14       11,307       66%         55
               15       -32,915      60%       -162
               16       17,205       70%         84
               17       -12,927      66%       -64
               18       25,635       64% .      130
               19       35,490       70%       209
               20       27,922       73%       234
               21       21,124       72%       286
               22          7975      90%       398

           . 23

                                 38
THE POWER OF BONDS

Bonds, interest rates, have more power on stock prices than anything I have yet uncovered.
Here's some hard proof, we see each TDW now but with Bonds in an up-trend, i.e., greater thu;
14 days ago;

MONDAY              $133,330          72%    239
TUESDAY               58,650
WEDNESDAY               5,022         65%    133
THURSDAY               15,597
FRIDAY                -6,792          65% .        10

                                      64%          33

                                      65%    -14

It's the same story with TDOMS as the next listing illustrates. Here we have each TDOM and
then next to it only trades when bonds were greater than the close 10 or 15 days ago.

           TDOM       $+/-     %Wins  Avg Profit
                      -7292      61%        -52
              1     -15,807      63%      -110
                    -12,280      60%       -87
               2     10,030      66%        73
               3    -16,207      68%      -122
               4     21,040      66%       153
               5     30,355      74%
               6                 68%       237
               7       5857      60%         46
               8    -19,115      67%
               9     36,970      64%      -148
               10                70%       260 '-
               11      8170      68%
               12    12,017      65%        58
               13    51,872      65%   '·' 85
               14    12,137      59%
               15    27,727      69%       378
               16   -19,382      64%        88
               17    14,847      65%
               18     -7567      68%       202
               19   26,657       71%      -155
               20    18,112      69%
               21      7477      92%       111
               22    15,860
               23      4385               -58

                                           218
                                           152
                                            93
                                           305
                                           337

Now let's look at ways of using this information to set up successful trading.

                               39
1.) MONDAY OOPS!

A. It's the ultimate S&P trade, to take an OOPS! Buy on Monday as long as Friday was not an
   outside day.. That's all there is to it, it prices open below Fridays TRUE LOW, on Moncr;
    ,buy long at Fridays low on a stop.

B. If the day that has just closed is Thursday or Friday and the open tomorrow is below the
    lowest low of the last 2 days, buy on a stop at that low.

2.) HIDDEN OOPS!

A. If today is Friday or Monday and the open tomorrow is 2 ticks less than the projected TRUE
    LOW for that day, based on todays TH+TL+C/3*2, THEN buy tomorrow at the projected
    low.

B. If today is Thursday and todays high is greater or equal the prior days close and the open
    tomorrow is below the projected low- 2 ticks, buy at the projected low on a stop.

C. If today is any day but Friday and the close is less that the prior days close while todays h-c
    is less than the prior days h-c AND Bonds have closed higher than the close 1 or 6 days ago
    AND the open tomorrow is less than the PROJECTED HIGH then buy long tomorrow at the
    projected high on a stop.

D. If today's high is greater than or equal to the prior days close while today's low is less than
    or equal the prior days close AND bonds have closed higher than the close 1,2,4 or 8 days
    ago and today is Monday, Thursday or Friday AND the open tomorrow is less than the
    projected low, then buy tomorrow at the projected low on a stop, (exclude Octobers)

3.) CONSECUTIVE DOWN CLOSES

    A. This calls for 2 consecutive down closes with today's h-c less than that value from
        yesterday, today is Wednesday or Thursday bonds greater than 2 or 20 days ago, THEN
        buy tomorrow at the open Plus today's h-c value.

    B. Exactly as above but there have been three consecutive down closes.

    C. If today is Thursday and today's close is less than the prior day and that day is also
        down close (close to close) while today's high is greater or = the prior close (no gapsj
        and today's high and low are lower than yesterdays high and low THEN buy tomorr?-- '
        today's high on a stop.

                                                               40
4.) MONDAY ONLY TRADES The following rules are only for entering on Monday

    A. Friday is an up close, Monday opens lower than Fridays close, greater than Fridays low
        and the h-c value is less than Thursdays same value or the c-1 is greater than Thursday '
        1 then buy Monday at Fridays close on a stop.

    B. Same as above buy Friday is a down close buy t the opening plus 80% of Thursdays
        range.

    C. Friday is an up close Mondays open is > close and < high of Friday and h-c is less than
        prior days h-c then buy Monday at the opening + h-c stop.

    D. Friday is a down close same qualifier as above buy at Fridays close on a limit.

5.) SHORT TERM SELL PATTERNS

A. If day of week is Wednesday and it has not been an inside day while today's close is

> 6 days ago and bonds are >18 days ago and today's open- the low is < than the

previous days same value sell short at the open tomorrow minus 65% of today's range

if the open tomorrow is less than today's high.  ..

B, A takeout day with up close and the prior close is > the previous days low and
   tomorrow open in < today's close and > today's low then sell short at the low before
   the fakeout day.

C. Same as above any day but Thursday, open > c and open < h then sell at today's close
    on a stop.

D. Same as above, open tomorrow < c and o tomorrow > 1 sell at open tomorrow --
    today's range * 10%.

B. Day of week is 3 bonds < 15 days ago close > c (1) and close high (1) and o tomorrow
    greater than the high sell tomorrow at high stop. OOPS!

C. Day of week is 5 and high < high (1) and 1 > low (1) and close < close (1) and the open
    tomorrow > close then sell tomorrow at open tomorrow minus 20% of today's range on a
    stop.

                              41
Data                : S&P 500 IND-9967 01/80
Calc Dates          : 08/09/82 - 07/02/99

1111!I III III III 11II11111i11i ALL TRADES - Test 1

Total net profit         $326, 727.00       Gross loss                -187,788.00
Gross profit             $514,515.00

Total # of trades        602                Percent profitable             84%

Number winning trades    511                Number losing trades          91

Largest winning trade    $15,924.00         Largest losing trade . $-5,Ł97.00
Average winning trade     $1,006.88
Ratio avg win/avg loss             0.48     Average losing trade      $-2,063.60

                                            Avg trade (win & loss)    $542.74

Max consecutive winners  25                 Max consecutive losers         2

Avg ft bars in winners        1             Avg ft bars in losers          4

Max closed-out drawdown $-11,397.00         Max intra-day drawdown $-11,919.00

Profit factor                 2.73          Max ft of contracts held       1

Account size reouired    $14,919.00         Return on account         2,190%

                         S&P HOLIDAY TRADES

Our Holiday trading strategy works well here. The following table lists the holidays with the
entry rules. The exit was to bail out after holding for one day past entry, in other words buy/sell
today, hold tomorrow then look to bailout. The stop is a very small $2,500 from entry hit.

NEW YEARS                Buy Open Third      TD Before Holiday
PRESIDENTS DAY           Buy Open Third      TD Before Holiday
                         Sell Close Second   TD Before Holiday
EASTER                   Buy Close Second    TD Before Holiday
                         Sell Open First     TD After Holiday
MEMORIAL DAY             Buy Close First     TD Before Holiday
JULY 4TH                                     TD Before Holiday
LABOR DAY                Buy Open Fifth      TD After Holiday
THANKSGIVING             Buy Open First      TD Before Holiday
CHRISTMAS                Buy Close Third     TD Before Holiday
                         Buy Open Fifth

Data                S&P 500 IND-9967 12/99
Calc Dates          08/09/82 - 07/02/99

II11IIIII III 111111IIII111111 ALL TRADES - Test 1 \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\

Total net profit         $108,675.00     Gross loss                 $-65,265.00
Gross profit             $173,940.00

Total ft of trades       170             Percent profitable           63%

Number winning trades    108             Number losing trades         62

Largest winning trade    $13,355.00      Largest losing trade         $-9,995.00
Average winning trade     $1,610.56      Average losing trade         $-1,052.66
Ratio avg win/avg loss             1.52  Avg trade (win & loss)
                                                                           $639.26

Max consecutive winners  7               Max consecutive losers       5

Avg # bars in winners    1               Avg ft bars in losers        i

Max closed-out drawdown  $-9,995.00       Max intra-day drawdown      $-9,995.00
Profit factor                      2.66  Max ft of contracts held               l
Account size reouired                     Return on account
                         $12,995.00                                         836%

                                         42
          S&P 500 ADDITIONAL SIGNALS

First of month Bond filtered trades - Buy the first trading day of every month from 1982 to
1998 with a 2 day exit and 90% of the range stop makes $182,350 with 56% accuracy and $99!
per trade. That's good, even better is the exact same scenario except Bonds close is greater than
32 days ago. Results; 59% accuracy, $147,925 average profit per trade is $1,286. Also consi~<:-
the TDOM's, month by month, when backed by Bonds.

OOPS! Day of Month - To improve my OOPS! performance simply take buys around the end
of the month. Taking trades from TDOM 19 on makes $45,000 with 83% winners on 18 trades
and an average profit per trade of $2,500 with $2,750 stop and bail out. Taking signals on
TDOM 4 through 7 makes a total $72,875 with over 80% accuracy.

The best TDOM sell days are 3,6,17 netting $56,675 with 77% accuracy sporting an average
profit per trade of over $800.

          TREASURY BOND ADDITIONAL SIGNALS

First of month Gold filtered trades - Buy the first trade day of every months, since 1977, with
a 3 day exit and $1,400 stop for $40,062 of profit and 55% accuracy on 241 trades or just take
these trades when Gold has closed lower than 5 days ago for 57% accuracy on 142 trades and
$34,344 on profits. Average win jumps from $166 to $241, a 45% increase, while draw down
plummets from $12,500 to $4,800. Also consider the TDOM's month by month, when backed
by Gold.

OOPS! Day of Month - Same game here as with the S&P, combine the OOPS! signal with the
strongest days of the month for some wonderful trades and further proof that a combination of
non-technical ingredients makes for the best trading medicine. Best buys are TDOMS 1,4,17
and 19 with a total profit of $48,906 with a hefty average profit per trade of $520 and 80%
accuracy.

The best TDOM sell periods are TDOM's 1,3,4 with $33,387 profits on 41 trades and an average
profit per trade of $814. TDOM 16 is also hot with 83% winners on 36 trades making $12,812
or $355 a trade.

                                     SP500
          BEST SHORT TERM BUY DAYS OF THE YEAR

JANUARY   9   9/13 69%   10,710
              9/12 75%   7,910
FEBRUARY  4   12/13 92%  12,170
              10/13 76%  11,165
MARCH     18  9/11 81%   9,075
              11/13 84%  4,135
APRIL     2   11/13 84%  11,585
              11/13 84%  9,260
MAY       15

JUNE      14

JULY      17

AUGUST    18

              43
         SEPTEMBER  20     12/13 92%        13,545
                           11/14 78%        12,725
         OCTOBER    11     13/15 86%        14,040
                           10/14 71%        11,805
         NOVEMBER   6

         DECEMBER   12

                    BEST SHORT TERM SELL DAYS OF THE YEAR

         JANUARY    1      9/13 69%         7,295

         FEBRYARY   13     12/14 85%        8,540

         MARCH      15     11/13 84%        7,930

         APRIL      14     10/11 90%        5,605

         MAY ' ' 3         10/13 76%        5,825

       JUNE         2      11/13 84%        17,085

         JULY       15     13/14 92%        14,910

       AUGUST       11     10/13 76%        7,285

         SEPTEMBER  3      11/13 84%        10,465

         OCTOBER    19     10/14 71%        14,450

       NOVEMBER     7      11/13 84%        9,395

       DECEMBER     21     11/14 78%        11,790

In the Bond Market I have found the best short-term trades to be those below. The rules are
slightly different, buy on the opening of the day shown, plus 7% of the previous days range
added to the opening. Use an $1,800 protective stop or exit on any profitable opening after 3
days.

                T BONDS BEST BUY TRADE DAYS WITH 4 DAYS HOLD

JANUARY 15          7756   15/18 83% -2050          3106      430

                7   10025  1317 75% -2018 " 3325              589

FEBRUARY 14         10150  12/17 70% -3725 . 5075             597

MARCH NONE

APRIL          4    8443   1318 72% -5075           2950      469

MAY            21   11575 10/11 90% -1862 ' 3168 1052

                22  5250   5/5 100%                           1450

JUNE           6    15737  16/19 84% -1862          5200      828

                1   7881 14/18 77% -2143 4512                 437

                17  7325   14/16 875 -1862 . 1825             457

JULY            18  9106   13/16 81% -1862          2356      569

                5   7962   16/17 94% -1862          1981      468

AUGUST 21           6056   12/17 70% -4662          2825      356 '

SEPTEMBER 20        15606  13/16 81% -1862          4075      975

(19-19)         2   6012   14/16 87% -1862          2293      375

OCTOBER 18(19,20)   14818  16/18 88% -2081          3106      883

                15  8781   13/15 86% -1862          2606      585

NOVEMBER 5          13662  15/18 83% -1925          2387      759

                20  8993   10/12 83% -2887          2887      749

4/2/            13  7800   12/14 85% -1862          2548      557

                           44
         21 4418 4/4

DECEMBER 10 12018 15/19 78% -1862 5168                 652

         12    11443 . 14/18 77% -1987  4356           635

         14    11412  16/18 88% -1862   2293           634

         15 6518 13/14 92% -1862 1512

         T BONDS BEST SELL TRADE DAYS WITH 4 DAY HOLD

JANUARY 2      12650  14/17 82% -1881   2887           74-

         3     9231   14/16 87% -3525   2762           51C

         20    8718   17/20 85% -1987   2793           435

         22    6387   6/6 100%

FEBRUARY 2     9268   15/19 78% -4343   3793           487

         4     7043   12/16 75% -1881   2856           440

         20    3381   3/3

MARCH 1        10350  14/18 77% -3756   5326           575

         5     9831   14/19 73% -4068   3137           517

         18    4718   15/12 80% -1862   1606           314

APRIL    11    12393  15/19 78% -3725   3793           652

(10-14)  22    3381   3/3

MAY      NONE

JUNE     10    9100   14/18 77% -4006   2918           505

JULY     3     7987   16/19 84% -4000   3168           420

         11    7743   14/17 82% -2387   2356           455

AUGUST 12      11293  15/16 93% -1862   2575           705

         14    6643   16/19 84% -3556   1793           349

SEPTEMBER 11   7450   14/16 87% -1862   1981           465

OCTOBER 6      6412   15/18 83% -2437   2731           356

NOVEMBER NONE

DECEMBER 4     13306  15/17 88% -2175   3606           782

         20    9506   15/18 83% -1862   2512           528

         17    8918   14/16 87% -1862   1918           557

                      45
Jln 3ff%
                             d^m&'^ ni

      <u!m ^ MJM&M mmm, xmfm^A Ml^>ydtwv

      $*$. Wm jyb jAcJot M(M M/miJJ&A wk

(».- /L,. ,,....,. . , . · yaJ] S.ISIM A////, i* /ii,Vi ''7-'^7?/,^>i /

·""T&& U                            M

                        ~.*s  ? (S^ is <m
11  f"  It

                                           m <w iiO/ /MY 71 -V) "1 o

wwfrjuo fimfl,' ^^mjj^m ,, ?i

                                            ·/M/b W
                                                          \

             ?                                   ^n^ ^ U\> (n
                             \x '/'                       ri
   <c
           >                          '"". "^ ---- !

 <§r                         ^                            . pJ-^>-
  ŁŁ?r<~~
                                 --------------  -^^
h3
                                      - < -7 3^ ·I' 'I
                                                 -cc.-
                                                                                            Po Y^

                                                 f--N *^. K~

                             >                   ^^\ ^=%
                                                 ^5 ?s g>^
                                                 v-^>     r <J^ iJ:~-( _

                                                 ^"~-~.

                                                 ^> * C
                                                      -i
                             \                             Uo                                                 f
                                      ..--
                                                          ve^
                                      "'" 5
                                 \^

                   ^ fe^EV   "\                  ^                                                 05? $

l^ -<for           ^ ^ ^^if      /% ^i
                §                U'l             TJjj~
s^
                                 ^^

                                                                                                          I^
                                                                                                          &-
                                 5

                                 c\.                                                                      PF5^ 4^ «
                                       "· /MŁ.( §pp?ffl>) piffi-niis v \A )MT PiM/fjrvw^i
                                       \..     '  '  " I 'J '       i  ' 'L

                                                                                                                9.h

                                                  0/7

.'.- 7/wsfnf' J itf l^'fl/V -^fflMT ^                                         TP f :J
7 ^ · ^S ·t!.-:...vv  w xaywmf few ^ v
                         ~?~ / f . ^~  >    1                                                                 . ' s\
LWi tv wi - - ziwf
                      ·  /v                    y// f iW/ j^//m/ ·n  (,/·"""',, <r'-'"' ;"7
^ftfvwofr*. ffim!/ '^^f^/^/ijmi'O^ '^jm 7/]pp/z> ^ idy
5?
v/

        ^AiJimM
O
                                           '      '     '        '

                               " m^

Wrvtfrj.                                          ^f/wty'fifpfr

^is'i^rWmw/ftfs/j!/(if/a (  'ifpr-pw jwn w $ w       1
                            V                 (/        /^ t I

cMwrrf^ Ts--Wyfmmjfj^ (tm"f-v/nT(J ^Im/ "
W A JmfJr.

                                     ^Jm/Al/alJ^K

                                                                            i (/ *

                                                                      SELL
rmbwfIrT ?w WM
                        Umi /m lo^ia/a,i /a,

                               &i altilt k 45 M

§

     JIMd xk
     *                                           J  )

ft-
     fcf '

                      \.

                             ·0

                          fe*-- ?vi

                          ^: ??-

                                                         ^·7
                                                      V- ·-

~v'  I-

     &

         I

     -^
                       ^
                k
                    .^-
            a.
r>      -1 ^ !~

    IU
   fel*

r        ^ ^^,
i
i
^^k^a/i/^ (Umiiod^ ^^ja ^Jmc\
                       IA                                 \
                                                             /I
%'/'.-·
                                                         Iki
         ·J
                                                                         '
    M
                                                                d -tt m
                     6 i, V                                                                  /'

                                               //  / /'               //  f
                                       /d&^M MX J/uo X?
                                           \/      ic V,,V/; .  ^'//

                             yA.       4I          a

                                  S.r

                                       jte nmli d^
 !m/m '                                                    -tin

                     1                              ^
                                         <rm
fl ( '

/ "'i.f'f ' !             ,,

     vw - » v .         / Ua

                                     'Y
                            '<fo rmu/ · &·

ytfmTWt/^ /"· lV" " f U -W
'' ·'*-<'  ^
I

 BOOK I
