ONCE THE PREMIUM IS THERE...We need to turn our attention to what the premium
doing in relationship to the market. A new high in price should have a new high in the spr?:.^. T
it does not, that is a negative sign, buyers were no longer bidding for the nearby.

On a correction the premium should out perform price action, i.e., price makes a new shon term
rally low and the premium does not.. .it "holds up". That is very bullish action telling us rnp, ^
correction is not the start of a market slide.

The fact there are only three paragraphs here should not dissuade you from studying this
relationship. I have written about it in other places.

LARRY WILLIAMS ENTRY TECHNIQUES AND RULES

        Most traders begin and end with entry techniques. I don't see it that way...my base is
set up trading, but I still need entry points. Here they are...

1.) CHANNEL BREAKOUT TRADING

Don't sneeze at this...first popularized by my friend DickDonchian in the late 1940's...it hit the
big time with Richard Dennis and his Turtles in the 1980's. Last year the Turtles are reported to
have made about $100,000,000 on their managed funds. Granted, they have a zillion dollars
under management now, and have implemented may of their own rules, but still.. .a
$100,000,000 is a lot of money!

I broke the dam wide open when in 1988 I promoted seminars for Russell Sands, the first "Turtle
to Talk" and reveal all. The system, which Russell still teaches, is based on buying 20-day
breakout (of the highest high of the last 20 days, lowest low for selling) with a 10-day stop or 50
day breakouts with a 20-day stop.

This works.  /

We can make it work better by waiting for a setup market--then and only then--using a channel
break out. My research shows a 12-day breakout works best for the set-ups.

                                  llfl

                                       11

                              15
                             THE IMMUTABLE LAW OF AVERAGES

  Markets can only be understood backwards;
But the problem is they must be traded foreword

Timing is always a traders greatest problem/opportunity. I do not know of ANY purely technical

timing system that maximizes profits. My thinking is that by selecting trades based on th- ··-····-

and then bringing in the timing tools we will have more success than just taking technical ouy

and sells signals. ······'-  ··

Surely, this is one of the most important laws operating on our planet. Just as with the Law of
Gravity, this law impacts our everyday life, every day. On average the weather in San Diego is
72 degrees with fluctuations above and below the average. WHENEVER the temperature rises
above that average for very long it's a sure bet that eventually things will cool back down. Even
our personal relationships are that way; they are pretty good on average, yet run in hot and cold
streaks.

2.) THE 18 BAR PATH OF RIGHESTOUSNESS

I have chosen to use an 18-day moving average to help us understand commodity prices. There
is no magic to this average, it was chosen largely because is has been used for years and is
readily available in chart books and software.

While none of us would resist the Law of Gravity, traders every day disregard the Law of
Averages. The basic rule is that if price is below the 18 bar average you probably don't want to
be long unless there is an EXCEPTIONAL REASON to buck the trend.

PATTERNS TO THE LAW OF AVERAGES

KISS AND COLLAPSE--This is the primary pattern that sucks traders into losses. The length
of the moving average does not matter; the length simply identifies or isolates your time frame.
When a market has been in a steep up/down trend and takes a run up/down to the moving
average it will usually trade their for a bit then--just when we went long--collapse, pulling back
to the dominant trend.

BUMP AND RUN--This is the pattern I like to see when looking for a trend reversal. In this
case price runs into the moving average horizontally while in the Kiss and Collapse the meting is
the result of a vertical move. Bump and Go is a visual representation of trend slowing
suggesting a much better probability of a trend change.

BREAK AND GO--Our final repetitive pattern takes place when price rises above the
average signaling a trend change, the pulls back or actually works both sides of the ave
resuming the trend change move. This is a very powerful move you should be on the
for.

                                 16
See Pages 88 Through 92

              SIMPLE TREND ENTRY TECHNIQUE

Precise timing of our entry is the greatest problem/opportunity. I do not know of A_ Y
purely technical timing system that maximizes profits. After all these years, thousands 01
research hours and who knows how much money in research I have still not found a msmv
profitable timing system that can be used on just one market. Trend following systems
work only on a big basket of commodities on the assumption something in the basket will
have a big move and pay off the little losses.

        THE ESSEENCE OF MY METHOD IS TO FIND A MARKET SET UP BY

COMMERICALS, PUBLIC, SEASONAL, OPEN INTEREST, DMI/ADX, ACCUMULATION

DISTRIBUTION, PREMIUMS AND THE LIKE--AND THEN AND ONLY THEN

ESTABLISH A POSITON ONCE THERE HAS BEEN A CHANGE IN TREND. THERE

ARE TWO COMPONENTS THE SET UP, WHICH IS NOT A REASON FOR ENTRY, AND

THE ENTRY WHICH IS A TIMING MECHANISM NOT THE REASON FOR THE

TRADE.                                                                .,:-:;,'

         HARD AND FAST RULES FOR THE 18 DAY AVERAGE

A buy signal will require that we have two consecutive days with lows that are above
(greater than) the 18 day moving average of closing prices. Neither of these day can be an
inside day (that's a day with a lower high than the previous day as well as a higher low).
Given this condition we will go long at the highest high of these two bars.

A sell signal will require that we have two consecutive days with highs that are below (less
than) the 18 day average of closing prices. Neither of these can be an inside day. Given
this condition we will go short at the lowest low of these two bars.

This system does make money on its' own as you can see from the following listing of taking all
buys and sells without any setup criteria. This is comforting, we know it works, but the accuracy
is low and it is replete with whipsaws. Our purpose as traders is to bypass as much of this as
possible and I know of no better way than with the setups, thinking and common sense.

18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE WITH 2 OUTSIDE BARS 10 YEAR RESULTS

COPPER        29.2 (THOUSANDS)

S FRANC       48.9                           ,        .

B POUND132.9             ·                    ^ .:···.;
                                             . - "\"'r ' I
CORN · - · · . 35.8      ..,..· J· · ' .
                         ''' V ^ 'A
GOLD          83.4                           ;vi-\.;  ' ''../''.

JYEN          147.5      \: 'J \ ·                    ·           \.

COFFEE        188.0         · \ ,,

HOIL          30.2                        A

BEANS         87.9       v

                            17
EURO     30.5                                                   " '·'      /; "
SUGAR                                                                          ^'
WHEAT    96.0
DMARK
T BONDS  41.5

         79.1 r

         44.8 · . ·                                                    /

3.) QUALIFIED TREND LINE BREAK ENTRY

This is a steal from Tom DeMark, my trading buddy of more than 25 years. Tom has come up
with many novel trading ideas and way of looking at market movement, as most of you know.

A few years ago Tom told me how to tell if a trend line breakout would succeed or not. The idea

Tom shared with me is that if the day before the expected trend like break (to the upside for a

buy signal, reveres it for a sell) has an up close the breakout is suspect. Exceptions would be

inside days following down close days and up days that close below the opening, those days

would not disqualify taking a trade.                                                         ;_. ; ... > \.

Tom has added that gapping above the trend line, even if the upclose days were present, is ok for
entry. Tom does like to see such a gap move up from the opening a few ticks to confirm
The buy, down a few ticks to confirm a sell.

4.) A NEW INDICATOR PRO-GO                                             -.  "' ' .- - .. - ·  '?*'·,..-:.'-*,
         TM^^TM"TM"""^^ --·--··"^--' m-- '""" TM" ~" ^-TM-- --

Many, many years ago I wrote about how to separate public buying from professional buying.
The essence of the technique was to create an A/D line for the public that shows the change from
yesterdays close to today's open. The professional A/D line is then constructed by using the
change from today's open to today's close. Those two lines clearly "tip" us as to what is really

We can take this one step farther by simply constructing an index of the previous close to open

+/- values and then taking a 14 day average which is plotted against a 14 day average of the +/-

values of the open to close.                                                       ·

I can see at least two ways to use this data, and there may be more. The first is to simply look
for divergences between price and the Professional index. Price lows not matched by the Pro
index are bullish. New highs not matched by this index tend to be bearish. \ -:-,,-,

Additionally, crossings of these two indicators have given some excellent intermediate, term buy
and sell signal as the charts below depict. This can be used as an entry or timing technique wim
the rules as provided at the seminar.

See Pages 93 Through 100

                                                                18
5.) THE FAILURE DAY FAMILY
The market loves to catch people by surprise. Never forget that statement. The following
patterns can be used to enter the market taking advantage of what looks like a strong ma:;-:c:
move. The underlying truth of these patterns is that the day after the pattern prices do e,-_,.._,; T ..--
opposite what "the crowd" was expecting.
FAKE OUT DAY--Here we have a higher high, higher low and lower close than the prior aay -
for a buy. The sell is just the opposite, a lower -high and low with a higher close. Buy/Sell at the
prior days high/low.

SMASH DAY--This is a bit like a fakeout day. The pattern to look for is a day with a higher
high, low and higher close. BUT, the close is substantially below the open. Taking out this day
high is very bullish. The sell is just the opposite, a down close substantially above the open, with
a sell at that day's low tomorrow.

                                                    19
NAKED CLOSE DAYS--This is a nice term coined by Joe Stowell. It's easy to spot, a naked
close "buy set up" requires a close lower than yesterdays low, buy at the high of this down close.
A "sell set up" requires a close above yesterdays high, sell at the low of this up close.

SPECIALISTS TRAP - For a sell look for a strong uptrending market that goes into a trading

range or "box" for 6 to 20 days, then thrusts up on big breakout day. It may go on, or it may not.

Our sell will be at the true low of the break out day. If prices are in a down trend and go into that

box the reverse of the above, buy long at the high of the breakdown day.                               ,

                                      WHEN TO EXIT

Well, let's see, we've narrowed down the markets we will trade for big moves and have also
determined our buy and sell points. All that's left is to tell how to get out of the trade.

                                                      20
1.) MY LEAST FAVORITE EXIT TECHNIQUE        y

I hate this exit technique, but it is the most important on in the world. What it is, is simply u
dollar stop. While this is not fancy it's protection and that's what we all need. The amount YOU :
are willing to lose on a trade is dependent upon three things, 1. Your belief in the trade 2. -... ,,--
size of your bankroll and 3. The volatility of the market.

I believe all these trades will work, but know some won't ...this means I cannot fall in love or
marry a position, some of them will not work out...the sooner your accept that hard dose of
reality the better your trading will become.

These major mega trades we are looking for have often made $5,000 to $10,000 a contract so I'm
willing to use a stop of about $ 1,500 as final proof I am wrong. Smaller traders may want to risk
less, but the closer your stop is the greater the probability that you will be stopped out just before
the big move begins. Each of us must ultimately decide how much we want to lose.

I will also protect against loss by a rally to new highs if short, new lows if long. This does not
mean I'm through with it...I'll be back on the next buy/sell...if the conditions are still there.

2.) THE AMAZING 3 BAR ENTRY/EXIT TECHNIQUE

This is one of the very best trading techniques I have ever developed. It is really quite simple,
once the market is in a run away move, as I call it a "Rock and Roll" market - then and only
then--do we use this entry. Price must be out of a trading range. ,

If so, and we are long, determine the highest close in the up move so far. Count that as day one
and go back to get two more days. None of these can be an inside day. Once all three days have
been noted, then determine the lowest true low of those three days. Place your stop to exit (sell
short?) at that price. . ·, , . , ., . . .

If short determine the lowest close in the down move so far. Count that as day one and go back
to get two more days. None of these can be an inside day. Once you have all three days note the
highest true high. Place your stop to exit (buy long?) at that price.

AN INPROVEMENT?? In recent years I have noted this; in the buy example, if the day

before the low close was an up close then go back one more day, and again use no inside
days. If the high close, in a sell example, has a down close the day before, go back ~"tt *"«»-o

day. Again use no inside days.

See Pages 101 Through 103

                           21
.V, ·>·  EXTRA EXIT/ENTRY TECHNIQUES

If I'm not stopped out the only other thing that can happen is to take a profit! I will use o-- ... ..-
following techniques to exit;

1.) STOCHASTICS...I will be very tempted to take profits when the slow % D hits 75% i: s^_
long, 25% if short. If the market is trending quite strongly I may wait for a crossover of D
and %K, and again, I'm using the 14 bar weekly series. This may get me out too early, but
there's little perfection in this business.

2.) 3 BAR...I also use the 3 bar exit technique...as discussed earlier in this presentation. This is

an excellent technique to use when a market goes in a tight trend move. IN FACT, THIS IS

THE BEST TRAILING STOP TECHNIQUE I KNOW OF TO HOLD ON TO ONE OF THESE

TIGER MOVES...IN AN UP OR DOWN MARKET.                              s .,,

3.) THE 18 DAY MOVING AVERAGE...You can use the 18 bar moving averages as an exit

technique. This works well for holding onto long term trend moves.  ·      - .,

4.) CHANNEL BREAKS...If all else fails, I will exit at the highest high of the last 20 days if
short, lowest low of the last 20 days of long.

No one has perfected long term trading. If so we would see funds with more consistent results.
But there is big, and relatively easy, money to be made by locating markets that make major
highs and lows, getting aboard and staying with them as long as possible.

5.) TARGET SHOOTER...Finally, don't forget to use our handy dandy target shooter to
determine levels were price should go and bounce.

See Pages 105 Throng h i D <

  ,.,-.;'./& ,vv,.^ ·: ADDITIONAL COMMENTS ,; ;',A;,\,- ':-:.:·'. --^

                         THE "CROUCH" VERSION TWO-WITH PRICE

      THE SECRET TO THE INTERNAL TRIANGLE, OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT

Chartists have long been fascinated with chart pattern such as the 5 point reversal or exDanams
wedge first written about by a fellow named Wetzel in the 1920's then popularized by C^.I_, ,,.
1935, only to be picked up by Edward and McGee, then re-popularized by Wilder in the i?ou s > ;

Price seems to "crouch" down into a formation then spring into a major move. The prco;c~. ;D
the more you study these patterns the more confused on can become. Curtis Arnold was the first
person to mechanize and prove there are profits* in these configurations with his PPS systems
(phone 407-747-1554) for more information.

                              22
My twist to all this has been to identify two crouch patterns we can trade and establish some
rules, especially rules for when the patterns change mid stream, which they often do.
Let's start with the traditional Triangle. Schabacker called these coils, Gartley coined the woiu
triangle and identified that there must be four points of contact with point one starting af::r -·"··:
he called the mark-up move. He also went to the heart of the problem saying, "...triangles z-znzTM
as continuation patterns, as wells as reversal patterns."!
What I have noticed is that there must be two lower highs and two higher lows to establish the
possibility of a triangle and that the expected move will be in the direction of the mark-up move
(These swing points or triangle points should have 3-6 days on both sides to be valid). In other
words the move that created point one is the most likely move to develop. Now lets' look at a
chart to establish our references as I have identified them. ALSO NOTICE WHERE THE STOP
POINT CAN BE A VALUABLE CONTRIBUTION FROM ARNOLD.
The problem comes false breakouts. Can this inherent problem be overcome? I think so by
waiting for a close that is above the last triangle point if buying or below the last triangle valley
if selling. By doing this, should a new triangle develop, we will be able to reconstruct the next
triangle within the even larger triangle and take appropriate action. Hopefully the following
diagram will show you how this develops. The key to this pattern is to keep in mind you must
have two lower highs with a low point in between that is greater than the previous low if selling.
For buying you need two higher lows with a high point in between that is less than the previous
high. The triangles shown may help you get the point.

                                                    STOP

                                                     23
                                CONGESTION BREAKOUT TRADING

                                   MY 8 WEEK BOX APPROACH

       Major market moves frequently come out of congestion ranges. Here's how to spoz --
and trade these set-ups.

About one third of the time a market will trend, the other two thirds it's in congestion zones,
backing and filling almost with a mind of its' own to find stops, punish or frazzle traders
endurance. Then, low and behold, one day it rips out of the congestion zone leaving most
traders on the sidelines nursing their wounds, cursing their "luck".

SPRINGING THE CONGESTION TRAP IN YOUR FAVOR...Instead of getting caught in
these traps let's turn them to our advantage! The way to do it is to scan through your charts
looking for any market that has been in a sideways move for at least 8 weeks. A further
"definition" that may help is that it has been at least 8 weeks since a new rally high or low has
been seen.

Isolate the 8 weeks and identify what the major trend move was coming into that 8-week box
and expect a break out in the same direction. But, keep in mind that 12 weeks later you have a
new 8-week box and the major swing direction may have changed. In any event, mark off the
major trend lines in this box. Our wager is price will smash out of these trend lines. Our game
is one of waiting for these congestion ranges to set up before we get involved. . . this is a
waiting game.. .if you can't wait don't play.

Our timing indication of this can come in many ways. Some of the better are extreme
Commercial Public readings, VAN-DIV set ups, DMI loss of trend integrity, 3 point trend line
break outs Pro/Go, seasonal indications and all the other tricks of our trades. I also use Tom
Demarks' qualified trend line entry technique.

                    . .. AND HERE'S THE SECRET.. .KEEP SWINGING. . .

OK, you've been patient got into the congestion on a breakout up or down on the assumption
this should catapult the market. Hopefully it will. But, happy camper that you are, don't
become complacent. . .it may well be a false breakout.

Which means you need to keep a new 8-week box and take opposite breakout signals untii one ^
of them is the big one.
Clearly this means you may be whipped around a little, my guess is 1/3 of these initial signcu:; --
will be wrong and you will be stuck in the mud with other traders. BUT, you got in later
you know one of these days it will break out and more importantly--YOU DON'T CARE
WHICH WAY IT ULTIMATELY BREAKS OUT--in fact you must trade these congestions
with 1) no predetermined belief 2) the conviction and bankroll to take all breakouts until the big

                                                      24
 one bites your bait, knowing you may loose a few lures first. That is your cost of doing
 business.
 If you cannot stay the course do not take these trades. If you can, you will catch some of the
 biggest moves on the year.

                                           ENTRY TECHNIQUES
Here are other approaches I use:
Short term swing points.. .1 will buy/sell at the penetration of the last short-term trend point as
shown below. But again, keep in mind there must first be a set up of some sort, I will not take
just any reversal.

Volatility breakouts. . Generally speaking. . When the market is "primed" I will buy at the open
the next day +100% of the previous days range. This can be a smaller figure for some markets,
buy year in and year out it has been very good.

                                                                       Buy X'/,

                                                      y ·/.

                                                       25
       STOCHASTICS...THE MOST OVER-RATED TOOL OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
 I am not much of a fan of oscillators of any sort. They are dangerous, they are treacherous, yet
 there is a place for them when used selectively, and here that place is;

 1.) TREND TRADING WITH AN OSCILLATOR
What I'm about to show you works well with any of the standard oscillators. It is to simply buy
 when the index gets above 60%, sell when it falls below 40%. This is a good entry tool when
rest of our "work" tells us a top or bottom is at hand. It waits until the turn is made, but not too
long, and will keep us in for a long term trade should that develop.
2.) VANDIV...The divergence signals that really works
Nick Van Nice showed me this excellent divergent pattern that can be used on short or long-term
data. It is a new concept so I will go slowly. A buy is established when price makes a higher
low than the previous one, yet the oscillator makes a lower low. The reverse is true for a sell.
Price will make a lower high, while the oscillator makes a higher high. I'm showing the basic
pattern to look for and then actual examples.

                          BULL MARKETS AND THEIR DIFFERENCES
Not all bull and bear markets are the same. A commercially driven bull market will have fe-.v
'pullbacks, and those will be short in time and price. Speculative bull markets will have maj :r
swings, up and down, along the way. They are not buy and hold markets as are the commercials.
The way to tell the difference is the tight commercial markets will have a premium, and or
DMI will be rising as price rises, there will be Accumulation Line divergence's in speculative
bull markets at intermediate term highs and lows. The big "key" is the lack of pullbacks of any

                                                       26
size if that's taking place you know you are in a commercially driven bull market. One should
also monitor the commercial long/short position as well.

                                    MY INSIGHT INTO CYCLES

Traditionally, chartists look for cycles in time, 30 days from low to low, etc. While these cycl. _
do exist, the ones I prefer have nothing to do with time. They are as follows, and will help you
determine the future direction of price.

HIGH/LOW CLOSE CYCLE...As price begins to decline the closes are in the upper half of
the range, right at, or near the low, the close is at or near the low of the day. Then, as price rallies
the close "creeps" closer to the high of the day until it closes at or about the high, at which point
the up swing is about over. Also note large range up days or weeks don't dip much below the
opening, large range down days do not rally much above the opening.

RANGE CYCLE...There is a natural cycle on going from small ranges for a few days to large
ranges, back to small ranges. Short term traders want to await small ranges, take a position, exit
with profits on large ranges, then stand aside until small ranges again appear.

TRADING RANGE TO TREND... As above, prices spend a good deal of time in trading
ranges...then have run ups or downs and go back into trading ranges. Trend runs "suck" in
traders, when what we should await are trading ranges as they "produce" the trend swings we
need.

                 MONEY MANAGEMENT . . . THE KEY TO THE KINGDOM

All the hot systems and wining trades in the world will not Create massive wealth on their own.
It is the ability to parlay winnings that creates fortunes.

The way I traded $10,000 to $1,1000,000 in 12 months was mostly due to money management,
not arcane markets secrets.

The secret to it all is that as soon as you have made more money you must increase your number
of contracts based on the new equity. As soon as you loose you must cut back on the number of
contracts.

YOU'LL NEVER LEARN TO FLY UNTIL YOU LEARN TO FALL...

There are several formulas you can use. The simplest is to take the margin required to trade. ,,.__
a systems drawdown and trade one contract for that amount of money. Once you make that
much money, start trading two contracts, then three, etc., if you loose that much then cut bacK
one contract, and on and on it goes.
The problem with all this is after a big string of wins you will have way too large a position on
for the inevitable loss and as you have a string of losses and have been cutting back you will not
have enough contracts at the start of the equally inevitable wining streak.

A solution to this has been answered by ULTIMANAGER, software developed by Mark Thorn
now available from Genesis Data 1-800-808-3282 that allows you to test just about any
combination of money management as well as various elements of your system, like entries,

exits, stops and the like.

                                     ...

One of Ryan Jones solutions is to not increase and decrease the number of contracts at the same
rate. As an example if you increase one contract for every $10,000 gained you might decrease
one contract for every $5,000 lost. This protects your winnings. Now the problem is if you
follow an equity dip you increase at the old rate of one contract per $10,000 it may be pretty
slow going. So, Ryan suggests increasing, once you have turned the corner and are making

money again. The obvious solution is, once you have a win to increase now by the same

amount you decreased until you get back to the old equity high, then go back to the original
game plan, increasing by the $ 10,000 amount instead of the $5,000.

ON THE END OF A LIMB AND SAWING IT OFF

The problem with and optimal F approach or fixed fraction of your account is that once you get
on a roll you roll too fast. Let me prove my point; if your average win/loss trade is $200 and you
have 10 trades per month and you will increase on contract at every $10,000 of profits it will
take you 50 trades or 5 months to add that first additional contract. Then only 2.5 months to for
from 2 to 3, about 7 weeks to boost it up to 4 contracts, 5 weeks to jump to 5, one month to 6, 25
days takes you to 7, 21 days to 8 contracts... 18 days later you are at 9 and 16.5 days trading a 10
lot.

Then disaster strikes, as it surely must. You have now scooted out on the end of a limb and are
sitting there with lots of contracts on while the limb snaps when you have a large losing trade,
one 3 times the average of $200 or $600 per contract times the 10 lot so you just dropped $6,000,
you have not given back $ 10.000 yet so you trade a 10 lot on the next trade and lose another
$6,000. Now in two trades you are down 12,000 of from your equity high at $100,000.

The next trade is also a loser. 3 in a row, for the average of $200 x the 9 lot you are now trading
and you get tagged for another $1800 let's call it $2,000 so you are now down $14,000.

Meanwhile a "smarter" trader decreases faster than you, cutting back two contract for every
$5,000 lost, so on the first hit he/she is back to 8 contracts, losing only $2,400, side steppine ,;
another $6,000 hit...and on it goes.

AND IT CAN GET WORSE BY FAR....

Let's take a winning system. It wins 55% of the time and you decide to trade 25% of your bank
roll, starting at $25,000, on each trade. Wins are equal to losses at $1,000 each. Here's the way
the trades played out;

                                 28
$20,000 *.25 = 6 contracts on the first trade margin is always $1,000 in this example

1. -6,000     15,000
2 . -3,000    12,000
3. -3,000      9,000
4. +2,000      11,000
5. -2,000
6. -2,000       9,000
7. +2,000       7,000
8. +2,000      9,000
9. +3,000     11,000
10. +3,000    14,000
11. +4,000    17,000
              21,000

You made $1,000 yet had a 65% drawdown while a single contract trader would have dipped to
$16,000 a 20% drawdown!

Let's look at another scenario where we hit it right from the get go winning 5 of 8 trades, a great
deal, right?

1. +5,000 '   25,000

2. +6,000     31,000

3. +7,000     38,000

4. +9,000 · 47,000                ..'.'..'.

5. +11,000    , 58,000 (WOW)

6. -14,000 .  44,000              v          ;

7. -11,000    33,000

8. -16,000    13,000 WHAT??

Look at this...5 winners, 3 losers and you are down. How can this be, well it's a combination of
two things, one the money management that got you to the $58,000 also brought you down.
Plus, I threw in a kicker, the last trade was just like what the market gives us all the time, a loss 2
times greater than the average loss. Had it been the traditional loss your account would be at
$26,000. The smart trader who cut back twice the amount after the first loss would have lost
$5,000 on trade 7, taking him to $29,000 and -$8,000 on the double hit on trade #8 to show a net
of $31,000!

              MONEY MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES

The easy way is to buy the software Mark sells for optimal trading results for any system, or
combination, call for details. A bootstrap approach would be to first determine the pain you are
willing to sit through... how much equity dip you will endure. Let's say you have $50,000 and
will risk a 40% dip (you can vary this to suit your fancy).

                              29
For years we have looked for the fastest way to get to the end of the game. What I have learned
is that this is certainly the riskiest, and more importantly correct money management should be
about you and your comfort levels not maximizing gains.

If you divided this amount, $20,000, by the drawdown of the system, lets say that's $5,000 so
you can trade four contracts and sleep at nights. That would be your starting point.

Now, when do you increase and decrease? The kicker is the largest losing trade--it will come
back to bit you again--and sooner rather than later, so we need some protection. If our largest
loss is, say, $3,000, this one trade, one contract can cause a 15% reduction of our $20,000 at 5
contracts that's a $15,000 hit, consuming almost all of our equity dip cushion.

If money management is our only defense in this risky game, what type of shield can we employ
to protect us from the largest loss?

In private talks with Ralph Vince I learned that there are several things one can do . Ralph likes
the idea of dividing the Kelley number into the largest loss to tell how much money one needs to
increase and decrease contracts by. By and large the Kelley ratio number will usually come in at
.30 so we will use that for all systems. If my largest loss is $2,5007.30 means I need to make
$8,333 to bump up to an additional contract.

This seerns high to me, I might require just two times the largess loss generated in new profits to
trade an additional contract. In this case that's $5,000. Where the "truth" is no one knows at this
time but we are in the ballpark here by basing our ups and downs on the key ingredients of the
system, not just % accuracy and risk/reward ratio as Kelley does. Both Ralph and I feel you
need to make more than 100% of the largest loss before you can increase contracts. He may
have hit the nail on the head with Kelley relationship, it certainly is adaptable to all systems.
(You may also consider dividing largest loss by Kelley, in our example above that's $8,333 and
then dividing this in the he maximum equity dip you want, in the example above that's
$20,000/$8,333 telling us you can trade 2.4 contracts on your $50,000 account. Once you make
$8,000 you will trade one more contract. An even more conservative approach would be to take
40% of the new equity, 58,000 *.40/8,333 which tells us we can now trade 2.7 contracts. This is
probably the safest way to use these numbers).

I hope you get the point.. .this is not the perfect scenario but it gives you room to create a money
management program for you and your system...strategy will vary not only from system to
system but also from person to person and now you can tailor your system to your comfort
levels.

PROOF IS IN THE PUDDING...Now let's take a look at what happens when we employ si--
an approach in trading. We'll use a very simple system that buys on the opening every Monaav
if that opening is less than Fridays close. Our exit is standard Bail Out with a $ 1,750 stop.
Trading just one contract on all signals makes $79,200 with 69% accuracy and a risk reward
ratio of .81. That's the first clip.

                                                                  30
