I only trade one 4 can a day and still manage to make over $500 a day. And it's all thanks to my number one continuation model that allows me to never miss a move. And my reversal model that lets me trade even in choppy markets. Now, this system alone, I've maintained an 84% win rate and pass multiple proper accounts. And this doesn't matter if you're trading forex, futures, or stocks because this is an engineered move the market must make every single session without fail. And it all comes down to one single candlestick. No complicated indicators, no random guessing for your bias, just simple and repeatable market direction you can follow every single day. And this is all backed by six years and 87,000 candlesticks studied. This is the candle I will trade for the rest of my life. And this is the same candlestick that quit my 9 to5. And today I'm giving you all of it for completely free. My students are not going to be happy about this. What I'm about to give you. People will charge anywhere from $3,000 to $10,000 for this information. Some even more. And depending on how my inner team takes this, I may have to delete this video. So watch it while it's still here. But if I had this exact framework when I started, I would have been profitable in under a year. Instead, it took me 6 years of losses, 6 years of regrets, and 6 years of just starting over just to arrive at something this simple. And that ends today with you. Now, this is going to be a long video because I'm giving you everything. There is no upsell. There is no part two behind a payw wall. This is the complete system start to finish in one sitting. And I'm guaranteeing you if you watch this video from the start all the way to the end, you will go from feeling stuck and lost in your trading to being a trader who pulls money out the market on demand. And at the end of all of this, I'm going to be taking live trades with you on the same exact candlestick I'm about to teach. Now this candle and this move has been studied over a thousand trades just for me to give you this single candlestick that got me results just like this. Now it was not always like this. In the beginning I was stuck and confused between the SMC and ICT knowledge. I had everything noted down, all the models, all the POIs, all the liquidation that price could do, but it still was resulting me in a win rate that was not allowing me to trade at the highest level. And in the beginning, I would blame it on psychology or my risk management. But the problem was my strategy was too complicated for me to even follow it. Even though I had all the knowledge, it never converted into an executable winning trade or winning month or a year-to-year reliable system I could use. So that's why I cut out all of these confirmations and dumped it down to a single 4hour candle. Now, why the 4-hour candlestick? Well, simply this was the only candlestick I could trade before. I was trying to enter trades in between my work breaks or I would end up staying the entire night watching the charts just enter one position and have it take me out by the time I clock in the office. So that's why I converted all my trading into a single 4hour candle that allow me to be in the market in five minutes and then out in the next 10 to 20 minutes. That way I could actually focus on escaping my job and actually spending time with my family to now I can build reliable system that I'm solely using for my income. Now there are six 4hour candlesticks that rotate within a given day. There is your 1:00 a.m. candle, your 5 a.m. candlestick, which I personally trade every single morning, the 9:00 a.m. candle, and then the 1:00 p.m., 5:00 p.m., and 9:00 p.m. Now, these times are exclusive to a Wanda charts when you're using the Eastern Standard Time zone or UTC minus 5 or UTC minus 4 if there is daylight savings. Now, if you're trading this on futures and on forex, you would then want to be using the CME charts, which then show you the 2 a.m., the 6 a.m., and the 10 a.m., which is the only ones you could actually see on your chart, as well as the 2 p.m., 6:00 p.m., and 10 p.m. Once again, still in the Eastern Standard Time zone. If you're using this on crypto such as BTC, Ethereum, or anything else, you're then focusing on the 3, 7, and 11. And if you're focusing on stocks, the exact candle I trade, which is the 5 a.m., will translate into the 130 candlestick on stocks. Understand that knowing ICT does not equal you having a system. It's just a bunch of knowledge plastered onto your screen on market open and you don't really know which levels or which liquidity levels price is going to use for the day. That is why I've created the kiss model. which includes my two main strategy archetypes. Keep it stupid simple. Now, even this advice was given to us by Warren Buffett. So, if you think that the greatest investor in the market is trying to keep it simple and you want to have the complexity in a already complex market, you're already shooting yourself in the foot. So, I have two main strategies for two types of markets. the continuations or impulse markets which will rely on my candle impulse theory CIT and then I have a strategy for the ranging markets where we're starting to see lower conditions where there's indecisiveness in the market on a larger time frame. I will then opt in for the candle range theory. I do not trade one. I trade both and these are the only playbooks I use. anymore would be adding nonsense to a ready perfect or good enough system. Now, I'll be going into indepth understanding into both of these models. So, by the end of this video, you can go take a trade profitably using either or. Now, the one 4hour candle masterass, this is hours of information that people will charge for. So, I'm going to give you guys exactly what you will learn in this course. You will learn how to read a candlestick just like the institutions in those major hedge funds that you think are against you. I will then teach you how to identify a trending day versus a ranging days for the people who get confused on which model to use. I will then show you the novo box framework which will be on how you want to be positioning yourself for those impulsive days. I will then go indepthly in on the candle range theory for the ranging markets. Like right now, we are following one of the most low conditions, slowmoving times of the NASDAQ, and that is the model I'm using frequently to get winning trades day after day. I'll then go into the candle impulse theory, which is allowing to trade in impulsive markets like how gold is spiralating right now. that will show you how to catch the next move without having to FOMO in. Finally, I will then give you checklists on both models so you can have it side by side to your chart so you're having a mechanical system that you can actionably use the next trading day. I'm not giving you guys more information. I'm giving you guys tips, not even tips, but the exact steps to getting a winning trade, to getting your first winning month, to getting your first payout, just like all my other students. Now, we'll then go into the IRS model, and this has nothing to do with the tax man, but it is a very important entry model to get in before the institutions start howling down on you. Now, this is mainly on the 5m minute time frame or lower. We'll then go into the time frame alignment on how to relate your higher time frame to your lower time frame with cutting the fluff. So you won't be going through the weekly, the daily, the hourly, the 30 minute, the 15. I'm giving you guys two main time frames and you can interchange between the two depending on the day. And then finally, the last piece of the puzzle, which is volume, where you'll then have the auction marker theory behind the entire candlestick. So you can actually tell who is giving in all these orders to have us have this massive green candle here. And then finally, I'll go over some live executions I've taken with my students in the free webinar for the wins and the loss so you get both sides of the coins. Once again, this is just the game that we play. So I want to show you guys what goes wrong and how we adapt in those situations. Now on the first chapter, candle anatomy. how the candle is created. Now, firstly, there is a key understanding that you must inherit. Every candle is simply a lower time frame range. I want you to write that down. Now, what does this mean? This candlestick is simply a representation of price action that has expanded over a given time span. So, for our candle, that would be from 5 to 9. 4 hours of market data is being displayed to us. Now, in terms of simplicity, we don't want to just be displaying these random bullish and bearish candlesticks. So, we simplify it into a single 4hour candle which comprises of a open, low, high, and close. And we'll go more in depth into this. Now what you should notice is that there are certain phases that are being transitioned throughout the life period of that candlestick. We see that in the beginning of us starting that candle we are having a consolidation. Now in ICT terms this would be called your accumulation. This is simply where all the market orders are now deciding on where they want price to go for the next four hours. You then have the wick/manipulation move which is simply the fake move to get people in on one side and then take them out when they start to reverse the market. This is that engineered liquidity and I will still go in depth on this a bit more. And then finally you have your distribution which makes up the bulk of that candlestick. So we had a very strong bullish move here which related to us having a very strong bullish candle. Once again, this is just a representation of lower time frame data into a higher time frame view. Now, as you can see, once price finally closed off at the 9:00 hour, we get this last point. As you can see, our close for our 4hour candlestick is related to the close of the last bearish candle of the hour. You will also notice that the open of our fall candle relates to the open of the first candlestick that open at the start of the 9:00 hour. Okay. Now, this relates to any time frame alignment. If you are speaking about maybe the daily to the 15 minutes, this would apply in that scaling point or even the weekly to the hourly, that would also apply to the scaling point. For us, the main we focus on is the 4hour to the 5minut scale ratio. And then our final point is the exhaust where price once again is just finishing off and closing off for the day. Now that you understand how the candlestick is formed, it's important to now master your bias because I can give you the strategy but if you're not on the right side on the market, you will get taken out. The key is understanding the candle behavior. Now, environment one is your impulsive day. Price opens bearish. This is once again that fake move to draw in the sellers into believing that we're going to be selling for the day. We then wipe them out by reversing the market impulsively to the opposing side. So, everyone who was selling here has got taken out and now we're seeing the real market makers and all the big institutions really putting in their orders. This is where you want to be having majority of your move happening. We then finally start to exhaust when price starts to close off losing that momentum and then that will then leave off the tapering of a wick showing the fallen glory of that bullish portion as well as the lower shadow showing the former glory of that bearish movement. Once again, every story within those 4 hours is displayed on this simple candle view. That is why I say that a single candlestick is going to make you profitable. A single candlestick is all you need. It shows you everything you need. It's what you learned when you got into trading. It's what you tried to overoptimize. And I'm simply bringing you back to the roots that will take you to where you want to be. Now, what does this tell us? This tyan 6 just simply tells us that the buyers are being prioritized in this market and this indicates that there is bullish incentive. Simple. Now with this type of movement we are also displayed with some different market types that you might see. There is the bar chart that the candlestick is also being related to. So once again this just shows the open close and the high and the low which in relates to a line chart which would be price slowly accumulating then manipulating strong distribution exhausting and closing off with low volatility. But the main commonality is this all led to a positive gradient which led to a bullish candle. And I want to make it extremely important that you understand this because if you understand price went through a positive gradient within those last 4 hours for that far candlestick to form, you want to be expecting price to follow that positive gradient giving you a bullish candlestick for the next 4 hours or even the next day. That's how I want you to completely dumb down your bias. Do not look at the swing high that was created in 2015 as a major liquidity level price reject from or the order block from 2020 that prices just touched. That is too much market data that is not relevant to you. If you're trading to be on the 5m minute time frame, you enter and you end and you're out in the next 10 minutes. What does the weekly PY have anything to do with you? And that's where many traders get confused. And that's why I've also dumped that out for my all my students when you when we go live 93 we're in with the sweep and we're out in the next 10 minutes. Okay. So that's how you want to take a bias for a impulse today. Now this is a bearish example. Price opens at the highs giving the bullish people some incentive to get in. This is price engineering that liquidity. We then take them out with this massive bearish move using them as fuel to give off this selling pressure. We then start to close off getting closer to the end of the hour. So if this was a for candlestick, maybe going towards 850 or 8:40. We're getting close to the 9:00 close. We see that price is now showing us a bit more bullish intention which leaves off a wick of that former glory and a wick or shadow of that former bullishness. What does this tell us? That sellers are being prioritized in this market and this indicates bearish incentive. What does that mean for you? You want to be following that bearish incentive. Once again, keep it very simple. will keep it in fact stupid simple to a point that you cannot make any dumb mistakes. Now, how does this look on different candle or chart types? The open or the top and the start of that candlestick. We then lead to the high where we had that bullishness, the low where we had the strongest amount of bearishness and then the close which is related to the hour. I want to make something very important. The open and the close is independent of the price. It is solely based on the time. Okay? which is also why you'll see it later on in the course that I make very high regard on the time of this open and close. Okay, the highs and the lows, they make importance of the actual price action. So, when I'm looking to enter a trade, I'm basing everything off a high and a low, not an open and a close, cuz these just depend on the hour or the time. These depend on a real market data of real people's emotions coming in what they believed was going to be a good stock for the day or a good sell for the NASDAQ. Okay, once again you can see this now in terms of a line format of a line chart. The most simplest one price slowly starting it then gets our buyers excited. It then takes them out as your high and then see the most sellers. The buyers step in once again as we close off the hour and then we lose volatility below. But what does all mean? We have a negative gradient meaning this is a bearish candlestick plain and simple. And thus it's a bearish candlestick. It will lead to more bearish movement. Okay. Now as you can see this market we have strong consistent selling. Okay. As you can see there are relevant volume spikes here or the points but that's not the main focus here. I simply want to display to you that these major body candlesticks are all moving one direction leading to once again the next candle being bearish. The next candle being bearish and as you start to see the body start to become smaller and smaller that is when we start to get a bit of glimpses of bullishness and then we get more bearish body more bearish body and we start to pick up momentum to have once again that very strong major body. What does this mean? sellers are being prioritized and you want to start to focus on that. Don't try and find the reversal here to the upside because you only get burnt in the process of catching a falling knife. Now, environment two is our ranging days. Okay? Now, I'm giving this to you guys cuz you guys will experience it. There's many creators only focus on the impulse days, the continuation days, but what about the days when the market starts to range? I know most of you guys are not just going to stop trading, right? So, I at least want to give you guys a model you can use so you know you're at least making a logical decision as not a decision just out of boredom. Okay, this is simply a what I call an indecisive candlestick, a balance between both the buyers and the sellers. No one truly knows if they want to take control. So, we have confusion since no market participant has proclaimed to be in power with our prior examples. the bullish people since everyone was going buys everyone else also start to scale in on those buyers and that's how you start to have that major body. Same with the sellers. They saw people selling. They got in fearful. They started selling more and more. But this no one knows what's going on. That's when we have our constant ranging. Okay. So these are where we have more wicks than body on either side. And the color of the candlestick does not matter. It can be a bullish candle or a bearish candle. It still incites the same confusion. Now this we see it's a lot more simpler for price to have our candle range theory because within a consolidation what happens price is attracted to the highs and lows. What are we doing? We're simply following the definition of a market consolidation. You go into the highs, price takes the high, then price goes to the low, price takes a low, it goes back to the highs. That's what happens in this area right over here. With the other examples, it was price going for lows, lows, and lows in bearish examples. And for impulsive days, it was price going for highs and going for highs. Okay, now as you can see, this is the Apple stock. Okay, but we just had a lack of direction. Even though it kind of looks like we're bullish, look at the volume. There's simply no volume in here. Even this isn't really important right now. I just want to show you guys just a simple demographic of it. Even though there are buyers here, it's led to another seller. There's buyers here trying to pick up the market, but then the sellers equal that out. The buyers try again. The sellers make a sharp move to show their ignition. The buyers try and come back. Sellers come back. Sellers try to push the market down. The buyers come back. As you can see, no one's taking the true handles of the market on these days. But what you can notice is that there is constant sweeps. This high got taken, then price took out this low. This low got taken, then price took out this high. Okay, that's what you notice. Now this is our candle impulse 3 more in depthly. This is the first model where we focus on the PCC. Now what does this entail? Our previous candle close. As you can see in Canada anatomy we already learned that in the first module. These are where the bullish candle closes. And what you can relate to this is that this bullish candle close is directly the same level as the next candle open. That's the one link you have to those candlesticks and it's quite literally how the market has to move. We're taking just simple engineering principles on the market and using it to our advantage. And what you notice is price will constantly okay close above a previous candle high in a impulsively bullish market. But then there's also a high chance that it will now exceed the high for the very next candle. Remember positive gradient. Now, your goal is to continue this trend of impulsing by getting in when price is below the candle close, below the candle close. You're entering on the wick. Okay? Right? You're entering as price is doing that manipulation. And I'll show you guys how to do this. Okay? For example, this is our first far candle of the day. Okay? Here we are. So, this is our first far candle of the day. And we mark out the close of this candlestick. Okay? Now, entertain this experiment with me. As you can see, the next 4hour candle fully closes above this high, but what's very important is that it opened at this exact point. We do see a wick. So, price did come below here, which was the bearishness trying to push price down, but they failed to do so. We now apply that same knowledge with our next candlestick. We place our line at the candlestick close. Remember, this is bullish, so it closes at the highs. And what do we expect now? For price to exceed that high point, but also it will open at the exact same point. Now, why is this happening? Why does price always open at the previous candle close? Remember, it simply has to relate to the timing of the open and the close. Those are independent of price. They're simply related to the time. So, to simplify this, let's look at a 1 hour chart. or 1 hour chart. This would be 7:00. This would be 8:00. And this will be 9:00. At 8 exactly, this candlestick has to close. And at 9 exactly, this candlestick has to open. So, if they are happening at the same time with maybe just a 1 second difference, okay, maybe 859, right? This candle is about to close. At 9:00 on the dot, we will see that price is still at the same point, which is why we have this common area. If you don't get it now, don't worry. There are still live examples I'm going to show you. So as live executions, okay, as you can see, the main rule of fortune is that this will always usually be at the same area. So this is a point you can look to buy under and target higher and get all these clean entries without forming in without waiting for a fair value gap that price has to retrace into without having to wait for an order block that price will take years to return to while you are missing out on the main move and hating yourself for it regressing your decisions. I'm giving you guys a scapegoat. Okay, that's the main point. Make your strategy so simple it accounts for even bad psychology. It accounts even for bad risk management. Now let's actually start to dive in and make this more specific. Okay, now this is actual data I got from testing this on multiple charts. Okay, now this was an automated back test. But as you can see using this simple candle impulse model, we see that we have 89% of the time on a bullish day we see price immediately has to open at this area and it will close above the previous candle high point. Okay. As well as on a bearish day, your price opens at the uh close at this point. The next one will open at this next point and it will close below here and you will obviously catch your entry. What's also very important is that your entries are from above the previous candle close in a bearish scenario and below in a bullish scenario. Okay. But how do we know the exact retracement level that price return to? This is when these levels become your main guiding point, the Novo box, your daily framework. Now, then let me actually show you guys where to get this. It's for free on Trading View. You're going to go into the section which shows the four lines with a dot on your left panel. You will then scroll all the way down and you should find the GAN area where you'll then indicate the GAN box. Make sure to favorite this. Once you have that, open up the settings and these are the exact points I use. I use a blue color to stick to my theme of calmness. The zero is the starting point. The 25 is your first zone 0.5 75 in sequential order. And then you have your 100% or one right labels with a faint background so you can actually see the candlestick. And then these are just some extra time levels. Okay. So, I'll take give you guys a moment just to screenshot this if you want to or as well you can add this to your chart right now. Okay. Remember guys, I'm giving out this entire presentation for free on our email list. Okay. So, if you want it, make sure to subscribe to that. It should be in the first link in the description. Okay. Now, in terms of actually drawing this, you're drawing this from the candlestick high if it is a bullish candlestick all the way to the bullish candle low. If it was a bearish candle, okay, you'll do it from the low to the high. Okay, so just remember the levels should be inverse. Okay, you will know that you have it correctly set up if your 25% is the closest one to the candle close. Okay, if it is bearish, the 25% you will see that it will also be at the lows instead. Okay, now this is my four candle bar strategy. The upper end from the high to the 25% is our premature zone. Now with this you can expect price to retrace into here. Okay, I want to make something very clear. In an impulsive market, you should not be expecting price to make a deep retracement. Why? Because it's simple logic. If price creates a deep retracement, that is no more impulsive. That gives you a fair share of buyers with a subsequential fair share of sellers leading to this very slow uprising movement which is going to be a consolidation. But in a impulse market it is buyers that are being prioritized. So the sellers will have a shortlived moment price to 25% then we go to be bullish. The second zone is the optimum zone which is from the 25 to the 50%. This is where you'd likely see majority of your retracements happen. price will push retrace into this area and then continue pushing higher. Once again, that is normal impulsive nature where the buying outweighs the selling by at least 7x. Okay. Now, once price breaks above this high, you then want to look for a rebalancing. Okay. So, your first one is when we do the initial retracement. The second one is when price breaks out from the high. Okay. You should have got your first entry by here maybe targeting this prior high point. And then your second entry will come once price once again rebalances this 4hour box and then you get another entry. Okay. Why am I giving you guys this variation is simply because I understood the problem with many traders. Sometimes they miss their first position and they just want to form more in or they want to scale up their accounts. The main thing greed is a human in nature behavioral system. what allows us to survive and try to override it by just quotes and seminars and audio books is not going to help. You want your strategy to allow you even in those stressful situations of your emotional distress, you can still execute at a high level. Okay? So, if you miss the entry, just know price will rebalance it and you'll get a second entry. Okay? Now, this is a bare scenario that I was speaking of. Once again, you're drawing this from the low to the high. And then you have your 25% here, your 50% over here, and your 75%. Understanding that the danger zone is from that 75% area. Okay, I just want to just quickly go over this. So once again, this is your overextended area. If price within here, just know that your setup is about to be invalidated. It is no longer impulsive. If prices close in at this area and then obviously if price reaches here, this is a complete reversal. Okay, price has not followed that bias for the day and you simply do nothing. Okay, easy for you. Now with the B scenario, once price breaks out of that far candle box and you've already gotten your first entry, this allows you a rebalancing so you can get a second entry to then continue targeting lower. Okay. Now, there are specific TP points I use exactly for that mod. Okay. And these are TP points I have tried and tested them over and over. In fact, also was maybe kind of lucky. But you know, God also allow me to see these exact levels and they always give a reaction to price once it breaks out of our candle box. Okay. So, very wise that you also do listen to that at the later on of this course. Okay. Now, once again, why does this make sense? is because it's part of our lower time frame bearishness. Price is simply going down, retracing, going down more, retracing, going down more, small retrace, going down more, smaller trace. You understand? Now, price continues to go down. Now, how does this look in terms of your lower time frame? Now, you first have your 4 hour. Okay, remember that's your higher time frame alignment. And then the lower time frame would be the five minute. Okay, that's the relation that I use. Okay, 4 hour to five minute. In fact, even sometimes you'll see in the live stream, I'm directly starting on the four I'm starting on the 5 minutes, okay? Because I have certain indicators that um allow to to see my far candlestick on the same time frame. Okay? But as you can see, as price is breaking out of that far candle range, it will slow down, come back and hit it once again. Okay, this is our IRS model. I will still go over this, but as you can see, you want to be entering on this bullish impulse to the upside to catch in on your scaling in or your re-entry or your your first entry if you did not get the first one. Okay, as you can see right there, simple model breaks out, rebalance, continues higher. And what will then this lead to at the end of the day at the end of the session it will lead to a very full body 4hour candlestick that you have perfectly traded because you used a single candlestick for your context for your bias for your direction and your entry. Okay. Now this is just more in depth of this. This is looking at a daily standpoint. Okay. Just to make it more simplified. So for a daily candlestick this would be obviously your Tuesday, your Wednesday and your Thursday. And what you notice with our Wednesday candlestick up here, we have the high, the close, the open, and the low. Price follows the AMD schematic, accumulation, manipulation, distribution, and then price slows down, exhausting once again. Now, keep in mind, look at this. As we're closing off Wednesday, okay, it's reaching 1153, 1154, 1159. We're slowing down, but look what's happening. Price is transitioning through the accumulation. Right? As we accumulate, bang, we start with the minulation manipulation for the start of the Thursday candlestick. Okay? Right? That's why the accumulation even though it's overlooked, it is a very important part of the formation of a candlestick. Okay? Right? It allows it transition from one day into the other. Very rarely do you see us impulsively moving to a new day. It's usually a slow period and then price picks up as we go into the relevant sessions for New York and NASDAQ. You'll see that Asia London is slower New York distributing. Okay. And once again, the cycle continues throughout the day. Now, once again, this is your daily candlestick. You can see there your lower time for entries are happening at the wicks. Okay. So, here's Wednesday candlestick. Wednesday movement slow accumulation for the start of the day. You can see there it is midnight 6:00 a.m. very slow. Okay, we then go into 12. Okay, starting close into the afternoon session, we then see price makes this very sharp movement. Okay, wicking impulsiveness and then bang, we come back with sellers. What does this mean? Even though we're impulsive here, look what happens. The sellers bring the market back down. That is why I say if we are having a deep retracement, that is not an impulsive market. this in an impulsive market because as you can see this bullishness outweighs the selling. Okay, but moving back to our main concept here, here's our next daily candle starting a new day. What do we do? We transition through an consolidation through an accumulation, right? And then we manipulate. Okay, these lines, what are they? Our previous candle close. Very correct. As you can see, the previous day transitions through that. Here's the previous candle close transitions. Okay, into the new day through this point of entry. Okay, you are buying below it. Okay, you are buying below it. You then see heavy spiral as we get into the afternoon of that day. Okay, right. And then we start to close and slow down as we get back into the midnight session. Once again, you seeing the trend here is our Okay, this is not obviously drawn to scale, but just to illustrate this, but you see this is your previous kind of close. We open at the same area. Okay, we dip below. We're trying to buy below that and then target high. Okay, right. One thing that the normal base AMD does not account for is the fact of that actual candle close. Okay, it's just levels based on sessions and consolidations, but it's not based on the actual formation of the candlestick. Okay, once you adopt this and I'll show you some more techniques on how to get more precise with this, but you'll see that a lot of your AMD models or your lot or majority of your candle impulse days will be having a high win rate when you implement buying below, okay? Or selling above in a bearish day. So once again, buy below the PCC, okay? Then you can target the range high. You will sell above the previous candle of close and you target the range low. Here is a bearish example. Okay, gray is bearish for me and you see blue is bullish um for me. We have our previous kind of close and this one's actually drawn to scale. You can see this is the actual area price starts to slow down. Okay, very strong bearish day, very strong bearish candlestick. We slow down. Okay, we then go above our previous candle close. Okay, you can see even as a small wick, it still makes that little move back up. Okay. And this is just to show you guys that um you can still catch this, right? As long as you can understand the consistent model of it, you'll be able to catch on. So once that price goes above, you're looking for entry model, which I'll show you guys. And then you enter your trade and you can take target lower and lower. Obviously, there's relevant re-entries, but I will show you guys that later on. Now, here are some times to focus on in terms of your current impulse days as well as your your even CRT days. Okay? So, you want to focus on that midnight open. Okay, you're looking at this from a daily candle point view. I still recommend that you want to use on the 4 hour. Okay. And then your entry time frame for London is obviously 2:00 to 5:00 a.m. and then obviously for for New York that would then be you guess right 9:00 to 11. Okay. Right. I say this it's in between the 9:30 open. Okay. To the new PM transition. And here's some indicators you guys can go ahead and grab. So once again, screenshot this if you have to or if you're going to want the entire full presentation, just get it from the link in the first um part of our description. Okay, this is for both midnight open and this is to get those divider lines for each and every single day. So you can for yourself test this, okay? And you get to look at it for yourself. I'm just teaching what I know, but it's not going to do you any good if you don't go apply this on your chart and prove it to yourself that this works, okay? And then you can come back and actually work with me and hop on a few calls, okay? And actually join the live sessions where we execute live every single day. But that is a very good way to test it, back test it and just look at it from a plain market view to understand the concept. So how does this work? Now with your midnight open and your 830 open, okay, if you are selling, you want to be above it. Okay, it's the same thing with our PCC. Here's our PCC. Okay, by rel okay, right? or the midnight open depending on the time variant you're using. But a lot of the time you want price to be above it. So you can look to sell and then target low. Okay. If you are doing the posing side, you want to be below them. Okay? So below to buy higher. Okay. Let's go get um a quick refill of water. I'm doing all this live for you guys. Okay? This is not me just taking my previous videos and just mashing them together. This is me actually revising this with all of you. Okay. Now, our entry models to use. Okay, this is just a sneak peek into this. There's still a few more, but for your kind of impulse theory, okay, make sure you understand the turtle soup. Okay, now what is the turtle soup? Is a combination of internal and external liquor. Okay, but Novo Vox, what does that actually mean? So, take a look at our bullish leg here. So, we have a predetermined bullish leg. Okay, we have impulse, retracement, and impulse. Now, even though price is still going to be bullish, it has to sweep liquidity. It's the exact same as you going on a road trip. You have one, you have one destination, but along the way, you need to make a quick gas stop to fill up. It's the same thing with the market. It runs on liquidity. So, even though it's going to be going to the upside, it will make a quick brief move and take out a low point to sweep liquidity. Now, where is the liquidity at a low point? It's simply how you always trade, right? If you're looking for entry, you saw the breaker structure, you saw there's Fiji here and you enter, where would you place your stop loss? At the recent low, you wouldn't place it at the alltime low or the previous daily low. You place it at the most recent low point. So, the markets are just being very efficient instead of using all that momentum to drive the price all the way down to the all-time low to get your little stop loss is going to the most recent low because that's where the accumulative of traders are being. Okay? That's where they're all placed at. That's what they're all taught to do. I'm not saying it's a bad proof of concept. I'm just saying you want to understand what's happening at that level so you don't feel that the market is quote unquote out to get you. Okay? It's a simple game of the you know on the market. You got to play by the rules. Now at this point once price sweeps out this internal liquidity. Okay. Right. It's called internal liquidity because it's part of this overall bullish trend. It will then now go for external liquidity. Now what is external liquidity? It is the liquidity at the high. Okay. This is not directly correlated to this bullish move. is a gamification of price going all the way down here. Okay, so this becomes like your all-time high in terms of this pricing which it pretty much is. It is your all-time high. Okay, so price is total swoop here and goes to this point. Now, how do you trade this? Let's take a look at this chart example. So price is following a bullish trend. Now in this what we realize we have this low order block. Okay, but we have a bullish leg, a retracement, bullish leg. Most people when they're entering, they see that there's a order block here, right? They want to enter right here. They kind of see this bullish move. They enter their trade where they're placing their stop loss, right? Placing right here or at most they're placing it at this low point. Okay? But they never think of this low. They forget about it. Right? And as you can see, price drives all the way down, takes you out here, maybe takes you out over here. You hit the market and you see it reversing your direction. But all you had to do is understand the concept of total soup. Price will take out the internal liquidity, which is this fake low. And then you are entering at the next residing area. Okay, the most common point, which is going to be this old block. Okay, now how does it relate to our kind of impulse area? As you can see, we have our PCC, our previous candle close. At this point, you will see that the candle would go below here. As it's going below, it's sweeping our liquidity, okay, to then go higher. Here is our previous kind of close on the lower time frame, but price is sweeping down, creating that liquidity before it starts to push out. Okay, the second one is our MD which we did go through but once again accumulation or price in the start of the session manipulating to take out those initial um people okay and also attract newer stock in for liquidity we then distribute to take out that prior liquidity point from here and then we go to the downside the day once again PCC or opening of the new candlestick you're selling above here and here is a chart example All this slow accumulation manipulation to the highs and then it is redistributing to the opposing side. Okay, there we go. Power three as well that many people might know it as. Okay, now here we go. This is the second model of our Canada impulse theory. Okay, and I call this the type and go. I was so happy when I actually discovered this. This is actually the initial way I thought of this model. Okay, I'll go back on the chart. realize something that price firstly it goes above my previous kind of close in a bearish scenario or it firstly goes below in a bullish scenario but the common point is that price loves that 50%. It loves equilibrium. Okay. Now I'm not going to directly throw this into premium discount but I want you guys to start to pay very close attention to this. Okay. Because of the tap and go model which is the previous candle equilibrium price will move okay into the 30% of your previous candlestick and then it'll usually leave a large standing wick. Okay. All right. Why is it a large standing wick? Because it's a very fast movement away. Okay. Price went bullish here and then fast went away from that point. Okay. Once again confusion but it is the erection from price that you want. So you can start to get part of the selling momentum. Okay. Right. What does this look on a lower time frame? Here's your previous higher time candlestick. This is your lower time frame movement. There's the high. There's the low of your previous 4 candle. You then draw out the range 50%. What price does it starts off? Okay. Obviously, here's your previous candle close. Price goes above that and then reaches into the 30%. Okay. Now for all the smart students in here actually taking notes what does this also relate to right it also relates to our novo box okay the 25% and 50% okay that's why I said this was derived from I mean this is the main um point that that strategy was derived from okay so with our new high time candlestick which is right here this is the low time movement that price is playing and it sharply moves to the downside leaving that loss and wick these are the ideal ones you want especially on at 9:30 market open. You want a very fast move once price goes at 50%. Okay. And as you can see this is just more time frame alignment. I only use two time frames. Okay. Right. I do not I rarely ever even look at the daily especially now my recent trading is just the 4 hour and the 5 minutes. Okay. What I want to do is cut out the fluff. I want to cut out the extra steps that are between me and my entry. The more steps there are between you and your entry, the more room for error there is for you to make a mistake. There is more room for you to hesitate. There is more room for you to former in. There's more room for you to mess up and get a bad entry. But the less steps, okay, the less time frames you cut out, the more direct you are to game from higher time to lower time frame allows to also not only be more secure but also be fast with the execution. Okay. A lot of the moves we take happen within 10 to 15 minutes. Okay. In and out. Okay. We've seen trades go done and dusty within 2 minutes. Okay. Right. But you want to have that precise precision. Okay. We're doing trading to live a life where we are time free. Okay. Right. I know a lot of you guys are probably good jobs. I've worked with surgeons, soft engineers, computer analysts, you know, people in major high intensity scenarios. Okay. But it's very timeconuming. This gives you that gateway, but you also have to be quick enough to catch on with to the cam. So, our 4hour get our previous candle um high to low. This is just a simplified version of the gam box. As you can see, it's just the 50%. But from the high to the low, here is our previous candle close. Okay, there's the PCE, which is the previous candle equilibrium. And what do we see? Price has this low time frame bullish range. We then slow down, slow down. Bang. Where do we come to? The exact 50% of our previous four candle. Okay, which then leaves us last standing wick. Last standing wick usually at a market open or if you're trading anything London related. I mean it will relate with the London market open. Okay, it has to be on a London based pair. So as you can see here price goes above you get your change state to go over you get your entry and you're targeting the high okay right also notice is that first entry if you're very fast would have been like a direct limit here which I don't really recommend I recommend getting more feedback from the market and then here is the re-entry okay you don't know how long we're in you simply wait for price to rebalance that 4hour box as you can see here's our 4hour box price goes above okay once comes back here gives you another one to enter. Okay, now let's actually put this all into an actionable trade plan and that is the winning formula which is my 2026 strategy for success. Okay, now I'm giving you guys the S+ ranking. If you guys want the other rankings like the A+, the A tier, the B tier like I did with the CRT checklist, once again that is in the description. I'm giving you guys all the resources, okay? I'm not taking I'm not gay keeping anything from you. Okay. There's nothing that I want to keep. This is not I've learned that I wanted in the beginning. That's what I'm giving to you guys. Okay. Right. If my team doesn't like this, I'll just take it down. Okay. But for everyone who got early, well done. So this is our impulsive for our candlesticks. Okay. That's the very first thing you need on your candle impulse day. Okay. For the CI, you need to look at the last three to four candles. Realize when I say we're starting to understand bias, I'm not saying look at the the high that was created two weeks ago or the high that was made, you know, a whole month ago, right? Or the alltime highs. I'm saying the last three to four candles. This would suffice. Okay? Because I focus on immediate trend. Okay? That's my main my focus is literally the immediate trend. Even if I see that on the far they be like this certain high here, okay? Price makes a high goes down. where price makes a higher goes bearish and then so it's going bullish. I'm looking at this just to go down lower. Okay? Right? Because yes, price could maybe do that later on, but right now it's showing me that it wants to go higher. Okay? And I'm going to follow that. Right? And these aren't like small candlesticks. These are 4 hours. So this is 4 8 12. Okay? Right? Those are big numbers. That's a full that's a full um early morning day. Okay? So that is still relevant data you want to use. So once again, you want to align them and make sure they are in the same direction. So this all bullish, bullish, bullish. Okay? And you want to make sure that they are having major bodies. Okay? It's okay with having this smaller one, but as as long as you see that they are picking up momentum. Okay? And this also relates to the other model, which is the CRT into CIT, which we'll show you later on. Well, essentially that price made a stripped a previous low point here, grab liquidity, now has ignition. Okay? So it's going to want to impulse in regardless. Okay. The optimum zone once again is our 25% or 30%, you want to see price within this area. Ideally premature would suffice. Okay. But make sure it is in good regard. Okay. Just make sure you are not buying. Okay. Right. Or getting your entry above your PCC. Okay. Right. I I I opt in for you guys to get the PCC. Okay. Okay, the period kind of close getting and buying below there and then you're at least targeting this as initial targets and then you want to get more you can have the rebalance. Okay, either or you should get away with it if you have already gotten the impulse candlesticks. Okay, and then the additional liquidation. This is important for especially this model which is our total swoop equal lows trend lines. Okay, just the basic stuff we already learned. And then finally, your entry. You want to clear CSD to get in your trade. And then obviously you want to have your key times, which is being above the midnight or A3 for a S or below for a buy. Okay, this is extra. I wouldn't say it's a deal breaker if you don't have it. If you don't, as long as you have this, okay, and this and this, this is all levels of importance, okay, to make an S+ setup, okay? And lastly, you do not want to have great against you. Now, what does this mean? simply means if you're buying and there's equal lows over here, okay, there's a high chance the price could actually come and take those equal lows and then go higher. Okay, if it doesn't, okay, that's okay. But I just feel more comfortable being in a position where I know I'm not going to be obviously swept out, right? If I'm swept out, at least allow to be let it catch me at the around the corner, you know, where I don't expect it. But if I can visually see that price has an incentive to go lower, I'm not just going to blatantly enter because I have everything else aligned. Okay, so it's a good food for thought. Okay, so let's actually look at this in theory. So we have our 4hour candles on the on the side and this is our five minute time frame. Literally two minute time frames. I mean literally only two time frames. That is our time frame alignment. I could literally be on this chart alone and I would be good. Okay, I actually need to start using more of the 4hour candle um time frame, but this is this also very good. So once you have this, you look at your 4hour candle, it's pretty impulsive. Okay, good check mark, right? You have price just at the optimum zone as you can see. Just kind of tapped it. Okay, but I would actually wait for one thing. The most important thing also I did not mention this but if this is a four candle so your 5:00 candle this would be the 9:00 okay remember it's 1 5 and 9 or 2:00 then 6:00 then 10:00 remember that your openings are solely based on the time. So this dotted line is the opening of the new candlestick again and you can see it's pretty much the same level as our previous candle close. Now this dotted line is happening because we started 9:00 right here. Okay. This is exactly 9:00 happened, right? Meaning that this retracement here, it was not part of our CIT. Exactly. Okay. This is still part of the previous candlestick. Any market structure that you use to enter trade has to be based off the newer candle. Okay. So a retracement must be born on this candlestick. This candlestick has not done it full retracement yet. It is not. Okay. Right. You can see right here it's still above the PCC. I mean above the 25%. Do you guys understand? Okay. So even though price did retrace here, this retracement was from this candlestick. Okay. You see there's the high then it closes right there and then we open. So as you can see here's 93 open. Now what happens? Price goes down. Okay. To many alike, they would see this as a CRT. Okay. Okay. And this is what I'm actually doing this video to attack that problem. My students already understand it. But for everyone who has not joined yet, this is how you attack it. You're looking at the fall candles first. The lowest time can be deceiving. If the far kind of told you that it's impulse day, you want to follow the impulsive days. No matter what price does show, okay? So don't look for reversals just yet. Price is just coming back into your optimum zone. This is valid. Why is it valid? Because it is born of this candlestick. This trace was born of the previous one. This is bone of our current candlestick. So price has just retraced. Now this is our true retracement. Okay. So here's impulse. There is the true retracement into our optimum zone. So you can check this off. And at this point we're looking for additional liquidity. So like a turtle soup. What do we have here? Turtle soup. Okay. Strong low, internal low, external high. What else do you notice? Previous candle close. Okay. Look at that. We're below the previous candle close. This is making out for a good entry. Okay. And then obviously once you get your CSD, which is this candle close here, you're immediately in. Okay. So, we close the candle there in your trade. I usually recommend that you wait for the candle to actually close because I mean, think of it think of it this way. Okay. You'll see this on the live executions. Okay. Well, this is the fully printed out indecisive bearish candle. At one point this kind of looked very bullish and then like the last few seconds it completely reversed. Okay, to be bearish and I see a lot of you guys might be doing that. Okay, you're entering because it kind of looks like it's about to go. We're going to wait for this last few seconds we can fully reverse. Okay, so that's why I always want the price to be fully done printing it and then I know okay this is data I can use. Okay, so that's where we get our entry there and stop just below the low below the 50% to be safe and then you are targeting higher. Once again, there are specific targets I use. I'll be showing you guys later on. Okay. And should I show that? I don't know. I'll see. And then finally, this is also one of the other entry models I just wanted to show you guys. This is part of the RS impulse, the range, the sweep, which will then lead to another impulse, range, sweep, impulse. Okay, IRS. Yeah, that's our entry. Now, welcome to the ranging days. This is the market conditions that most of you will struggle in. Okay, everyone can make money on the bullish run. Okay, everyone, majority of everyone made money when Bitcoin and all crypto was going up. But where people struggled was when the markets became low volatile when there was indecisiveness when they were just constantly going up and down. That's why Iron avoids December. Iran avoids December because why? It's low volume. It's consolidating. It's bad price action. Once again, these are just external motives. Okay. All it takes. I enjoy December. Okay. I enjoyed December. December was very good because there was so much ranging days and so much strate. So, here's how you take this on. Once again, I'm preparing as to be prepared for any market. So once you done this video, you can trade in any market. Okay. So this is my 5 a.m. time CRT. This is my go-to model. This is my bread and butter model. This is the strategy I'll trade for life. This is the candlestick I'll trade for life. This is the 4hour candle I will use for the rest of my life. Okay. So once again just to reiterate, you want to use this on the UTC minus 4 and have the exact New York time on your chart. If it is daylight savings, okay, it will switch to UTC minus 5. Okay, so just make sure you check that out on trading view. Now with the very first part, we have the formation of this Y team. Okay, what does this entail? Is the actual 4hour 5M candlestick. Okay, the actual candle. Okay, that's all that is your entire liquidity level. Okay, that high is your buy liquidity. That low is your salocator. Okay, I reiterate it is not some subjective level that if I see it, you probably might see it or if you see it, then the next man will see it. No, everyone who goes onto their chart on Trading View will see that this high is printed at X at X amount 256, okay, level or at 245 tick. they will see this as the low. Okay. And that's the reason why I like this model because it is truly mechanical. It's not like you kind of have to be in my head to see it. No, all my students see the same candlestick which is why majority of the time we have the same bias. I mean we have also trade this on um Indian markets where there's bit more of gaps but even with gap markets once they print out the candlestick it will always have its higher low which is why you can use it. with a gap you kind of don't see that in a liquidity or stuff but with this you do know where to use it. Okay. Then the second part is the sweep of the CRT. This we're mainly looking at it on the lower time frame. Okay. So this is 4hour. This is lower time frame stemming from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Eastern Standard Time. You're looking for the sweep of your candle range. Okay. And then the obvious kind of impulse which is the reversal, the distribution. and where you're targeting easy money the opposing side of the range there is a few more okay so let's reiterate that okay our first step is going on the 4hour time frame marking out our 5:00 candle high and low we then go on the lower time frame you wait for the sweep at 9 to 11 and then you wait get your entry and you target the opposing side now once again keeping it stupid simple there are our six far candles that we have already discussed in the beginning name some of M being the 1 a.m. the 5 a.m. the 9:00 p.m. this all being EST. But all of these are 4hour candles. Okay. This where you start off your day. This where you start your bias and everything. It's on the 4 hour getting that candle. This formation creates your price range. Okay. Now understand this. All the price action contained between this far kind of high and low is to be is to be considered as liquidity that price will eventually sweep. Okay, main keyword eventually and sweep meaning that you cannot be entering within here. Okay, right. If it's a CRT day, you cannot just be blindly entering in here. Okay, and how do you identify if it's CRT? Okay, you look at the candle, is it more wick than body? Well, last 4hour candles showing more wick than body. Were they indecisive? Do we see bullish then bearish then bullish candle then bearish candle? Okay, remember you don't forgot this. Okay, go back to the first part in candle anatomy again right someone in the comments probably already made time chapters for this but I urge you please go back now once price does this you're waiting now for the super the CRT now this happens at different times depending on the 4hour cand that you choose okay here's where it gets a bit more specific now since I use the 5 a.m. 4hour candlestick I'm usually waiting for my sweep at 9:00 a.m. EST. Okay. Maybe even 9:30. Okay. 9:30 a lot more. But you will never see me enter a trade before 9:00. It's impossible, right? It is physically impossible for me to enter a trade before 9:00 if I'm using the 5 a.m. candlestick. Okay? Who you understands why? Okay. It is simply because it's simply because the 5:00 candle is stemming for 4 hours. So, it's your five, your six, your 7, your 8, and your 9. Okay? Right? Obviously, it's 4 hours, but that means that this candle closes at 9:00. The candle does not close at 8. It does not close at 7:00. It does not close at 6:00. You cannot use a candle that is still forming. This formation, it is already done. It's not still wicking up and down here or wavering. It is done. It is concluded. Okay? So, if you find yourself entering, if you find yourself using the 1:00 a.m. as your apology, if you find yourself using your 1 a.m. candle for your range, you cannot enter a trade before the 5:00. Okay? Why? Because the winding candle closes at 5:00. Okay? So, you can't enter before that. The candlestick will still be moving up and down. It'll be still defined. Okay? Is this the actual low? I don't want you guys to go ahead and guess because then you guess and then you're wrong. Then you point back at me, okay? When I didn't tell you to do that, right? And now, why would it be beneficial to use different 4hour candles for certain times, okay? I chose the 5 a.m. candle because that fit my schedule the best. Okay? Right? Even when I was like working or I had other activities in my life, the 5:00 candle led to me trading at 9:00 where I was most free. And because I was most free at 9:00 EST time, I would then look for a pair that allow me to trade at 9:00 which was NASDAQ, okay? Or gold, which usually move during that market open time, okay? So I urge you guys to do the same. Don't just take my exact system, okay? Even for my students, I have personalized the flip out of CRT or CIT for them because they simply they're all over the world, okay? some in the UK, India, Norwegia, Panama, like different states, they they don't have, you know, sometimes they work. Sometimes you just want to spend time with your kids at this hour. Okay? Right? So, don't just use the 5:00 and 9:00 a.m. sweep cuz I use it. Okay? Find one that fits you. Okay? So, if you find yourself you want to trade later on in the day, you are opting in for using your 9:00 a.m. as your range. So, you can trade at 100 p.m. Okay? cuz that's when the ning candle closes. Okay. Right. So that's just some food for thought. Okay. Now this commences the reversal phase. As you can see right there, there's a sweep and price starting to reverse. Okay. Here's where you want to start getting entries and everything. Okay. And then obviously the kind of impulse this price now going in one direction and it has now that liquidity. Okay. As you can see right here with the super high liquidity, it provides the market fuel. Okay. to the desired draw liquidity which will be immediately your for high. Okay, that's literally the main one. Okay, now the way to enters this are your candle impulsive which we were just mentioning before. Okay, what's happening here? Literally price is going below here then going high. Okay, this is a bit more of a deeper wick. Okay, this is just illustration but a lot of the time it's very short. Okay, price literally goes here then impulse. Okay. And even if you miss this, remember, okay, since what we doing now, we impulsing and impulse wick 50%, 25% either or you're entering below the previous kind of close to go higher. Okay. Now the dots are connecting. Now the jigsaw is being solved. Okay. And then RB stands for rejection block. Okay. Simply the the previous um candle that got high that got high and low being swept. Then use that also as a point of entry. Okay. So like this and price comes to this high point. Here's the high low got swept here low got swept here hingching on this point here. Okay let's go higher. I just prefer CIT or CD on the low time frame. [clears throat] Now let's actually go into everything based on the cand. Okay cuz that was just my single candlestick model. Okay. This is the second model where we use three candlesticks. Okay. And this really goes into AMD. Okay, as you can see, literally the first candle is meant to accumulation. What do we do in that first candle range? Accumulating. Second candle manipulates, takes out the high. Second candle just pushing out and starting the reversal. The third candle goes in one direction. Okay. Okay. It goes in one direction to that opposing draw team and you're entering within the camera. Now, this comes in the form of the what I call the 159 sequence. So this being your 1 a.m. candle where it was mainly part of Asia, the 5 a.m. being part of London and then the 9 a.m. being part of the New York. Okay. Right. So let's dive in. Now the counter range theory is applicable on all time frames. Okay? Even though our main focus even though our main focus today is the 4hour the theory itself is fractal. You can do it on the monthly, the weekly, the daily, all the way down to a literal 2 minute, a one minute CRT, a 15-second CRT. Okay? But why is this happening? Because on every single time frame, price needs to sweep our liquidity. And the easiest one is going to be the previous candle's high or low. That's it. That's the market at its finest. Once again, you guys are taking simple market principles and engineering it into your own. Okay? Okay, I'm not giving you guys some subjective supply zone. The subjective demand zone or random liquidity. I'm giving you what the market is showing you. Okay. So, as you can see, this is a example here. We have July candlestick making the high low. We then see August sweep out July's high. And then if you're seeing this, your thought should be, ah, September's probably going to be super bearish. Okay? Right? But it might be bullish in the beginning for that MD. Okay, accumulation manipulation bullish bullish and then distributing. Okay, to take out that opposing July low. Okay, right now these are for the advanced position size traders. Okay, well if you actually look at this closer, we realize something that in the peak of this retracement. Okay, in the peak of this reversal because the candle range theory is a reversal model, not a continuation retracement model. What you notice is that look at this. This is our August July high and low that we extrapolated from this candlestick on the monthly time frame. But if you zoom into the wick of August here, we see another CRT forming. We have the 8th of August, Monday, the 15th of August, Monday, and then the next week right after the 22nd of August, we have another CRT, another reversal. Once again, your monthly CRT encapsulated the weekly CRT. Okay, so now you should start thinking, how do I get in this earlier? You look at the weekly, but now, how do I even delve into this a lot more? Here's your weekly CRT which is at the peak of that monthly high. It also encapsulates another CRT on the daily time frame. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. You guys are getting the idea. Okay. And even down to the minutest one. We now use the daily CRT encapsulating a 4 hour. There's a far high, far low. This is the wick. might not be too visible because of the line and contrast here, but there's a wick here that sweeps both the far high and low point and then price obviously reverses. Okay, so that's just to show you guys that everything I'm showing you guys can be extrapolated. Okay, lower lower. Now, once again, depending on how you're looking at this, your time frame alignment has to be very important. But the one I'm teaching you guys today is the 4 hour the 5 minute. Okay, now what do you notice? Okay, the entire range is based off one candle. It is the foundation. Okay, so even though it takes three candles to finish it, it is based on a single candlestick. Okay, I'm still keeping my promise. All you need is one candle. Okay, trading already is complex enough. Don't make it even more complex. Okay, so the CRT high would be obviously your objective liquidity that person's target as well as the CRT low being the objective liquidity. Okay, candle range low, candle range high. Now this accumulation candle creates the range and the liquidity points. Okay, right. Remember this also you can call it your formation but this is in terms of the power three. Okay, so we then have the manipulation candle. This is the striking point where price will pivot from. Okay, since price already swept one area of objective liquidity, it's reached its first target. it will now go for it second target which is that low which is then you'll see the distribution candle will seek that unfilled liquidity point and you will now have a completed three stick CRT this literally right here is all you need okay what I just explained to you is the literal dynamic and engineering of the market okay right you go onto your chart right now open up trading view and I want you to look have a candlestick form like this followed by a candlestick like this and see what happens. Price will fall down. Okay. Right. For the candle impulse, look at a strong bullish candle followed by another stronger bullish candle. What happens? Another strong bullish candle or from a point the PCC. Everything I teach you guys, you guys can go directly put on a chart. Okay. All right. Now, keep this in mind. This schematic also can happen in two candlesticks. Okay. Which we already went over. Right. one where we sweep the high and here's another one where we sweep the low. Okay, now this is what they try and hide from you. Okay, they try and distract you with all these strategies or all these indicators. But this is the basis of the market. As you can see, this is not a normal market where you can just trade an impulse. Okay? Right? Or just try and opening range break out this like it's it's not going to work. there's not enough volatility for price to just break out immensely then continue that breakout and most you guys have taken last try into here and then bang price goes against you again how do you a this with CRT the high and the low you understand is the main liquidity point what you understand as well the candle anatomy the candle behavior it is low volume it is indecisive there's more wick here than I see more majority body okay right even though it's a fair amount but you want to be very strong body like overwhelmingly more body than wick which we don't have here and you can see that lack of volatility on the lower time frame okay price slow down we sweep we reverse okay cuz this is now become a ranging market where its sole purpose is to go from high to low even from low back to high okay now as you can see there is our AMD happening here okay so price is accumulating here manipulating distributing now the next point you want to understand are trends. Okay, not just trends but the liquidity that are in trends. Okay, so with a bearish market, all the liquidity be lying at the highs. What price always take out the lows? Yeah, price is constantly taking out lows. Meaning that there isn't liquidity lying there anymore. Okay, is in fact more liquidity as price keep stacking on and protecting and creating conviction. Not conviction, but a belief that price is now going to take out the highs. Okay, so there's more sellers here than there's buyers over here and in the posing side. If we're bullish, price is constantly taking out the highs. Okay, but what this creates is this unparallel point of indiscreant buyers just placing the stop loss here because they price going to go higher. Okay, and that in itself is a very good cause to take. Okay, you want to be following one bias till price proves you wrong. Okay, it literally has to prove to you undeniably that, okay, we're no more bullish now. Okay, that's when you're going to kind of take a hint, but don't try and predict the reverse. Okay, you guys are not at that level yet. Okay, see price now creates liquidity and what's happened within this. Okay, price now take us takes out liquidity. Okay, so you can see right here in the bullish market, I mean the bearish market, the liquidated those highs, what's happening? We are total swooping it. Okay, mandatory liquidation to continue the trend. Mandatory fuel up stopping the stage for gas to continue lower. Okay, as well as this a manner a mandatory stop to take out liquidities at lows to continue higher. Okay, without this price would not have the oomph, okay? It would not have the the the energy to transfer, okay? Those contracts to keep on going higher and higher. Okay? Right? But let me not say energy but obviously money. Okay, they take your money to fuel more moves. But using example of this scam, right? This is a very slow market. So I want to show you this in terms of your team. Even though the price is moving one direction, still very slow. But watch what it's doing. It's sweeping out lows. Okay. It takes the highs the lows to go higher. Sweep the lows to go higher. So lows to go higher. And what does it look on the lowest time from here? We have go high and place a low takes that low out. Goes higher. creates another low. Price takes out to go higher. Another low total swoop change state to go higher. Price gets another low. It takes out to go higher. Okay. So, literally this is part of the CRT orderflow is part of the flow of the market. Okay. So, you just ignoring this is you ignoring the flow of the market. Okay. Right. Obviously, as you can see, after enough CRTs, after enough liquidations, price now finally has the liquidity and the fuel and money to now just continually go higher. Okay, you can see now it's CIT, it's CIT, it's CIT. Okay, just going to close, wick in, buy, kind of close, wick in, buy again. And even though they are taking out liquidity from retailers here, it's not like you guys have a major pool of the market cap, but it is also just a means of them just picking bare entries. Okay? right? They can fulfill a lot of their orders a lot a lot better. Okay. Now, this also applies to bearish scenarios. Here we have a bearish candlestick high. Price ships out and reverses in terms of three sticks. So, here's foundation manipulation and distribution. We then have the foundation candle here which creates your liquidity high low. Price sweeps it, sweeps it again, sweeps it the third time, then goes low. Okay. But as you can see right here, we have what of course CRT within a CRT here have another candle range high and low point that does get swept out within that. Okay? Right on the same time frame, not just in terms of fractility. So once price has done this, it extends lower, sweep high to the lows, sweep up high to the lows and you can see that continuation trends. We now see this on the lower time frame. We have this strong fold high that sweeps out go lower even taking out external highs. Okay? And you can see this over here as well. But we like to just focus on the most recent one. Okay, I want to make this extremely simple for you guys. Here we have another one. Here's a high. Price sweeps it out. Okay, takes a few times, but it does go back down. Price a high. Very minimal for the reverses. As you can see, here's a few more highs. The price takes out and then goes to the opposing side. Okay, but now how do you enter CRT? Okay, now CRT I follow a very simple process, a very simple entry formula. CD. Okay, so change in state of delivery into a break block into an entry. I'm really giving out everything right now. Okay, and then you also have your nano CR. What does this mean? Okay, it's your inner CRT just like what I what you saw in the previous example. Here's the main CRT. So price keeps the high, but you have another CRT within that. This what I call a nano CRT. Okay, inner CRT or NCR where since price tips out this high and low, it now has enough conviction and volatility to go to the downside. Okay, to truly follow that next opposing side. So you can even enter on this candlestick. So this one right here, I mean on this candle as this one closes you enter on that you need to lower. Okay, that's I call NR. Here's an example of this. Okay. So there's the high and low price once but no true um change stadium. We come in a second time. Now we have a change state delivery candle closure. Price comes to break a block. Okay. Now what is a breaker block? It is a pierce order block that price is supposed to respect. So you can see right here I'm order block. Price comes back in here. It's supposed to go bullish to continue with the bullish trend but it doesn't want to. So it disrespects that order block. Okay. It is now broken. Break. Break. And then it takes out a low and I use it as the opposing side as what we call a breaker block. Okay. Now with this I like to get a bit more feedback. This is direct limit order. But usually what I want to do is if price gives me this bearish candle then I'm in on this one. Okay. And then my stop is above the high. Or if price comes a bit more deeper. Okay. This why I prefer a break block. Even if price doesn't respect this initially and wants to go to like an order block at the highs at the more premium, price will have to go past the breaker block again. Okay. So, it's better it's better that you are not missing entry cuz that's what I saw a lot in the beginning of my trading journey when I was very heavily in SMC. I want to get in on the most premium and most refined order block and I end up just missing the entire position. Okay. Right. You might see the same thing with your fair value gaps. They so high up in the the reversal that you even end up letting price retrace to that. Okay, remember this is a fast move by nature. Price does not have all the time to go all the way back up and then come back down. Quick move out, a quick move in and then back out. Okay, if price does a deeper move, you simply wait for that bearish move from that area. So, this candlestick would indicate my entry. Not this one, but this one. Okay. Right. And there you go. Okay, I also don't recommend going break even cuz you can see right here price love my entry so much that you had to come and visit it twice or a couple more times. Okay, and for all the legy students, you guys already know you guys have extra step. Okay, which I just kind of explained there. Sneak peek and then now how do you enter this within ACRT? Okay, so you can see here is a higher time CRT range high and low which is an over with a lower time frame CRT within that. Okay, so here is the inner candle high accumulation sweep manipulating we distribute. Okay, on see that candlestick has been achieved. Okay, you're simply just getting in on the candlestick that made the sweep. Okay, which is this one. So, bang bang. Okay, stop above the above the high. Okay, now here's some important timings for your IBM candle. So, the one that I use. Okay, so this is premarket which is the opening bell. this from 8:30 to 9:30. Okay, I include 8:30 because a lot of the news that does happen NAP, you know, CPI sometimes they happen those red folders, they happen at 8:30. Okay, right, that's premarket. So, just be aware of that. But 9:30 open is the most important one. You'll see there's a lot of entries that happen exactly at 9:30. We get an exact sweep of liquidity at 93 open, okay, in the US markets. So that is your NASDAQ and your ES or your NQ and your S\u0026P 500. Okay, for the futures and then there is the first hour of trading which is the opening range breakout which is simply what I already told you guys as kind of impulse theory CRT are even more enhanced V2 and then once again these key times are going from 930 to 103 now especially with the daylight saving shift okay I'm really giving you guys a lot of source right here okay prices now shifted from 103 okay to do more of those more higher volatility spikes okay right and then there's the midday consolidation which sometimes does lead reversal. If price has not made a sweep, okay, so price has not swept within the morning session. Okay, namely this area, it will then opt in to do a sweep within this timing. So from 11 to 12:00 p.m., okay, and then your PM times, okay, you'll see that if you have a double sweep day, okay, which is simply just ACRT on both sides. So price sweeps the high, then reverses, then price sweeps the low, and then reverses back up. Okay, right, that could happen once again within that midday consolidation. So just be aware of those times for if you train a different candlestick. You I say do some research on that. Okay, I've helped some other students with that one, but that is too much personalization for this course alone. If you guys want that, there's a free book call link in the description. Okay, now the 5M candlestick, okay, can also be once again translated into a 6 a.m. candle if you're looking at this on futures. But main thing is you get that power kind of high low then you're ready for a sweep. And as you can see right here we actually get a sweep more close to the midday consolidation just to show you guys an example. But we pretty much just stay in the range and we're doing nothing. Okay. So once you get that sweep here it's still kind of early but now I see reversal is price is candle closing above here change state break a block. Okay. So this is a bearish supplies or bearish order block. If price wanted to go lower, it would have retraced and then pushed off. Okay, this candlestick was supposed to push off more aggressively, but it didn't want to. That's price to us that it wants to reverse. Since we've seen this, we then get in on the reversal of this. Once again, get some feedback, enter, and we target, okay, the opposing side of the range. Now, I do show this on the 15 minute, but I opt in for the five instead. Now, here's some key times for the 1:00 a.m. Okay, I did feel a bit sweet today. So, for the London open, that is from your 3M to your 5 a.m. This is increased liquidity from the Lond. And you want to watch for the early sweeps, okay, from this 1:00 a.m. orange within this time. Okay, you then have your your pre-NY. Okay, so this is like 7:30 to 9:30. Okay, very early. Okay, just building up liquidity. Okay, with this, okay, this is 1 a.m. to 2 a.m. by the way. Okay, I mean 1 a.m. or 2 a.m. This this is just the institutions position themselves for the New York opening time. Now, obviously, this is post New York open which is 9:30 to 11. This is similar to the 5M strategy. It's still a high property sweep time due to the overlap and increased liquidity. Okay. All right. This is also when you see that price is doing a three stick CRT. Okay. which is the accumulation candle, the manipulation candle, and the distribution candle. Okay? Right? So, that's we use the 1 a.m. conclusion. So, there you go. Another example, this is us using a 2 a.m. now. Okay? Right? Just know you won't see this on a if you're using charts, it will always be 1 a.m. Okay? Won't be 2 a.m. And I just opt in for you guys just to use if you given the calls. If you're using features, use this then. But for this then price doing slow slow. We get a little sweepy at like 6:30. Okay. But it's not our main CPM. Our main CP is what time. Remember key times? 8:30. Boom. 8:30 comes in. There's news. Also, if we see there's red folded news. Just wait for the red folded news. I don't recommend entering before that because this is going to do some sort of major sweep which has to do in line with your 4hour candle. Okay. Right. That's why I tra this on days. But once you get that price goes above, comes back to your break with a little wick. You enter targeting the high or just a bit more. Okay. Remember, use those TP zones, students. Now, this for you opting in for the 9:00 a.m. candle. Okay, now this one your session is the mid morning if you want to look at that. Okay, that is 10:30 a.m. to 11:30 where we could have early sweeps um once the New York open volatility has now kind of died down. Okay, so this is where I was speaking about uh you don't really see a sweep at 5:00 a.m. and then you want to opt in for this. Okay. Well, no. In fact, even though you see sweep at 5:00 a.m. here, you would see the New York reversal around that 12, okay, 11 time, but you're still using the 5:00 as your range. This is using the 9:00 as your whole entire range. Okay? Right? I mean, you kind of see price like building this out. Okay? The candlestick is actually being pulled out, but the candlestick is now closed. So, pay attention. So, now going to 12 to 1:00, the candlestick has closed. This is a low. As you can see, the volume is slowing down because our 9 a.m. has just closed. But it has now established the higher time frame range that we'll be using. Okay. So, yeah, you're not really doing anything. You're just waiting for it to happen. Okay. But here's when the range has been created for your 9 a.m. candle cuz what? 9:00 is 9. And then there's 10, there's 11. Come with us. Okay. There's 12, there's 1. That's 4 hours. Okay? Right? So, it is now closed. And that is when you can use as your range. Okay. And then 3 p.m. to 4 p.m. This is literally going to mark close. We now have the power where it's a final liquidity grab as we start to get to the session close. So now this is another example here. This is where was the 9 a.m. or or 10 a.m. and you get a sweep. As you can see right here, we literally got the sweep at uh market close here. Okay. Right. Uh we do kind of bounce up and down there. I really don't know how some brokers some brokers allow overnight trading, some don't allow you. So just check on your regulation with your prof. I say this is pretty late with this. I would opt in for using a a different model that I really go over and I personalize it. Um but this is an option. Okay. Can still see price gaps away but it still gives you a good TP. I mean I'm seeing Ol do massive things with this. Literally gets trades teping into the next morning. Okay. Now the target setting. Okay. I'm really giving all of this for free. Okay. Good. So this is drawn from the recent um high to low. Okay. Now with drawing this, okay, if you're bullish, okay, you're drawing this from your four candle high to the sweeper low. Okay, notice that I did not say fully the CRT low. Okay, because on a given day, price if it's sweeping on a bullish day, price will sweep this low point. So this won't be your lowest point. Okay, right? your lowest point to be somewhere like here. So you're going from the high to that lowest point, okay? As price is reversing back up, okay? And you're getting your entry and this will give you your zones. Now want to go in your Fibonacci and make sure you enable 1.272. If you don't, just add it in. You want to add in 1.7 and you want to add in 2.145. Okay. Now, this is my minimum target when I'm going already beyond CRT. Okay. So obviously there is numerous targets. Okay. The most surefire target that will hit 90% of the time if price sweeps. Okay. Even if you're kind of wrong like even if you are you somehow saw us okay you could even if you saw a CIT right I even so even if you yeah you pretty much saw CRT on a CIT there. Okay. Where price instead going to you know just impulse in my direction. This would at least come back to the 50%. Okay. which is why I I'm saying that you can enter here and then literally target like there. Okay, it's not a good R but it's the highest highest highest winner. Okay, but to be fair with that even I mean you still be okay really. Okay, so the next one just make sure you're like on the 15 second like NDL he goes on the 15 second and he's in within 30 he's out within 30 seconds. Okay, just to get a good R for this though the second one. So 50% of the range. The second one is the obvious opposing liquidity. And then this is the first minimum target. Okay, this is if you are still kind of having some sort of vol you would target this. Okay, if you're citing, okay, that's like literally price can impulsing. You're targeting this. Okay, the 245, right? The 2145 or the 1.7 because price has the voltage to kind of reach. Okay, right. Um, if it's a bit slow on the day, you can kind of see we're starting to slow down, getting very late in the day, then I say, okay, you can go with 1.27 for your CIT. Okay, if none of that makes sense, rewind or book a call. Okay, that's the that's the way that's always going to help yourself out. Okay, the community that's locked in, that's locked for for a few days. So, the start to finish the start to finish for a bearish one. Here's a very good example. Here is the far low and then not the far high. Okay, cuz this would be a range high. But look, we already went past this. So what's the logic of doing that? You go to where price went highest which is your sweep. Okay, if you are CIT and then you can go from the far low to the far high because price would not have swept this this high point. Okay, it's just going to shoot down and continue shooting down. Okay, make sense? Good. Now once this does once again you're targeting either 1.7 or the 1.272. Okay drawing from recent low to recent high for bearish drawn from recent high to recent low for bullish. Okay. Now let's reiterate this. Okay. This is the checklist for our CRT. Okay. Once again I only trade at this one time every single day and I still manage to make money and I never have to look at my daily bias. All it requires is one candle, right? I'd even go ahead and say that even with bad psychology and fairly decent risk management, okay, you can be profitable with this, okay? Because the thing is the strategy is doing majority of the heavy lifting for you, okay? So, just follow it. Follow what I'm teaching and you should be good. Okay? So, with this, this is uh the main 225 strategy I used. Okay? Um I'm still using it a lot more in 226, but it is our CRT. So you're marking out the forecast kind of high and low. If it is forex or charts, you're using the 5:00. If it is futures or FXCM, another broker, it is the 6 a.m. candle. Okay, it's the same thing, just different labeling. Okay, maybe sometimes different pricing because of the time variation. Okay, but I'm using on gold on NASDAQ. So firstly, we want to super within what time frame? 9:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. You don't want price to quickly return into your range. You do not want price to break out and then just stay above here until New Year's come, right? You want it to actually break out and then come back in. That's what a sweep is. Is a quick move out and then back in, right? Isn't a whole goodbye. I'll see you next time, right? So that's what you want for an ideal ESPA setup. So as you can see since we swep the high here our bias is bearish. Okay, if you guys notice well once we have that the next point is additional liquidity. So I just did a quick mark up here. This is your far kind of high. Okay. That's why we have this high point and here is your far kind of low. You guys can't you guys can't really see the high because I really extended here but there it is. Okay. That's your far high. Now you want a additional liquidity. Why is that? What is that? It's just extra or internal liquidity. There is internal liquidity. Okay. Right. So price that out your CISD which is going to be with that body closes. So you can see price closed below here. You can see here here is a more aggressive entry. This is more confirmed. Okay. Stop off the high. Very simple targeting the P side. This is the cleanest CRT trade you'll see. Okay. Bang. Like it's so clean. It's like I literally look at that and I salivate because of how simple that is. Okay. Now, once again, these highs and lows are pivot points. Now, I use the word pivot very intentional because what is what does a pivot do? Once price reaches it, it rotates. It reverses. Price reach this point, it rotated and reversed. Since price has reached this point, there's a high likelihood it could rotate and reverse. Well, why is this? because that's what a consolidation does. That's what a range does. It goes from high to low, from low to high. Okay. Well, now let's go into the entries. Okay. Now, this is where the source of this where you guys would actually want to understand. That's my entry model. And to some that seems like that is the bare minimum. It can't just be it. No, that is it. Right. If I'm feeling lucky, I might add SMT. But even with that, guess I I think that's a lot. But this is all I need. The reason why I say this is you want your entry to be simple because you don't want to hesitate. This is the point. The entry is simply the vehicle from you going from thought and analysis into execution and entry and result. If this has like how I did in the beginning, 15 different confirmations for you to enter, not only do you get confused cuz there will always be conflicting signals. Secondly, if you ever take a bad entry or you first will never see a perfect entry because nothing will ever always line. The third one is that if price does not go your way, you don't know what to truly pinpoint or this less variables, less time, fast execution and then you also have just carefree mind. Okay, my goal as teaching this to you from the no legacy is for you to have gain clarity in your trading through a simple mechanism with one candle and then you with zero emotional stress. Okay. Right. So that is why my high high my high low my high when I once I see price has closed below my my high low. Okay. Keyword closed. It cannot just be that price has reached a zone and it's kind of just wicking around it. No, I need it to close because if price wicks this, it simply becomes a turtle swoop. Okay? It's simply just price going higher. Now, you guys ever think of that, okay? So, you want to see that candle close to see price committing itself to the reverse. Okay? Price points beating the game. And not only that, you want to see price retract of your breaker block. Okay? So I repeat your break block for people who skipped ahead. This is your order block. If price wanted to go higher and respect this order block, it would have pushed to the upside like this green candle would have been bullish here. A lot more bullish. But price failed to do so. Pricing no I want to reverse. So it disrespects this and breaks that order block which we can use now on the opposing end as a means to continue that bearishness. Okay. Now once you do this you want price to actually give you reaction. So which you can see my entry is actually based off the bearish candle that is made within the breaker. Okay not the immediate limit order but price actually showing me. All right here some feedback you can enter. Okay if it's a very fast day I would suffice. Okay for at least a candle close at most. Okay into then stop has to be a bit more higher in case price wants to go a bit more high. Okay now you can see what's happening here. major problem. The order block is now getting tapped. So, you have done all that analysis and you're not in the in the trade because you're looking for the perfect entry which you'll never get. Okay? You're not God. You don't know. You don't know what's going to happen next. You can't just speak something into existence. Okay? Right? You can't just tell Mars to go here and then it's going to reverse and go there. Right? But just make it that you have enough on your on your side. Okay? which is literally the bare minimum so that you can see that price is going to want to reverse. Okay. Now, finally, this is our IRS model has nothing to do with the tax man, but it will help you to feel a bit more carefree when you are paying him. Okay. Right. So, this is our model that we use especially for the candle impulse theory. So, price firstly starts to impulse. It then ranges creating that liquidity which will then have to get swept to T as well. And then once press has done this, it makes that impulse. Okay? And once price continues this, it will continue this loop. Impulse range sweep. Impulse range sweep. Impulse range sweep. Okay? And you get the idea. Even on the opposing side, impulse range sweep, impulse, range, sweep, impulse. Okay. Now, finally, the time frame alignment, your daily sequence. Okay. All the way to your entry. Okay. We already went through this with little snippets but just to drive it back home if you really want to add that daily time frame. Okay. Right. You want to go through this route whereas your daily your 4 hour into your 5 minutes. Okay. This is 5 minute 15 five. Okay guys. So daily just looking at the candlestick solely. Okay. You understand at least your previous day high and low. So if it's a bullish candle price has a high likelihood especially if it's massively body like this to seek those highs. Okay. Right. If it's um bearish and it's going to stick the lowest game your look for what type of CR you have. So either it's a three stick or a single candlestick CR team and then the lowest time you're getting your models entry models which is your total soup and your change state. Okay. And then with the CIT okay here we go daily candle very strong bodied you then go far you look for your CIT. So your candle close, okay, previous candle close the 25% you're buying at that point to go higher and the lower time frame. Once you get that um CSD, you enter your trade, go higher. Okay, guys, that's just some alignment with the daily. Okay, once again, these are the two that I rotate between and it might take you guys some time to transition. So at least have max three. Okay, I I would say that you know if you want to be a bit more technical, you can have it like less than 5 minutes. So you can have the 5 minute, 3 minute, 200, okay as like your lower time accumulatively accumulatively. But do not have it that you have the weekly, the daily, the 4 hour, the 1 hour, then the 30 minute, and then the 5 minute. Like that's too much, okay? Cuz at that point, you're going to see 15 different CRTs. They end up looking and going all the opposite direction. Okay? And that will be inevitable. So that's how you cut out the fluff. Okay? Now coming in on this. This is our next stage here. The volume. Okay. Many will skip this but it is it is something I want to share with you guys. Okay. Right. It's not it's not a m it's not a major make or break but is a good addition. This is the only addition I really add to this so you guys get an in-depth understanding. This is all about certaintity but not confirmation. Okay? It's certainty, right? It's just confirming what you already know. Without volume, you would already know that the candlestick is already bullish. Okay, I already showed you guys giving you guys a playbook to know. Okay, the volume just shows you it. Okay, so you can be like, okay, I was right. Okay, so on a volume profile, what does it comprise of? Now, this is the free one. You can literally go on to the same toolbar section where you got the gam box from. You scroll down and you'll see volume profile fix range one. Get that and plot on your chart. Okay. So you draw it from any range. So this is the low to the high. And you'll see that it this has a O dive movement. Okay. Or a bell curve. The higher the bar, the more volume. The lower the bar, the lower the volume. Okay. Then there are three lines extending from your PC which is the price most agreed upon. Okay. This you see prices maj consolidating a lot within you because everyone's kind of happy within you. Okay. people weren't pushing the price too high because the sellers like no this is a good price for this asset. Okay buyers when the sellers went a bit too low the buyers like no let's push back up that is a good price for this asset. Okay up until the stability was shaken and then the buyers said okay yeah flip it no let's go higher okay and that's where the volume area high comes in. So this is the standard deviation from this. Okay, in simple terms it is the 35% okay away. Okay, so this at least this entire area covers 70% of the most of volume traded. Okay, this is 35% on this upper end and this is 35 on the lower end. Okay, volume area low or what I just explained. Okay, the lower end of volume. Okay, for that point. So now what does this all mean? Okay, in your value area, which is this area here, this where most people consider this as a fair price. Okay, within this area, outside of that, that's what we considered inexpensive or cheap or inefficient pricing. For all of you, that might sound very very familiar. Okay. Right now, on the other end, we have our low volume nodes. These are these unnot unnoticeable zones that price doesn't want you to be fully aware of, okay? They are very important. Now these are found on the tapered ends. So literally the lowest part of this volume area, the lowest node or within what I call value. So here is a high value um area bar. Another high value area bar. Then price dips in here that is our low volume node in our value. Okay. Inefficient pricing. Now here are my settings. Okay. So once again, pause the video, take a screenshot, take notes. Do what you got to do. Once again, if you want to take the smart route, just get it in the description, okay? It's already there for you for free, okay? Everyone else was already in our in our community. You're already going to be get sorted this out um before the release date. So, once again, 3%. And these are just all colors. Okay? Everything else on the inputs is default. Okay, guys. Now, there are four common shapes that our volume profile can come in shape of. Okay? We have the P shape, the area where our volume area is at the upper end, okay, of the range. And then you have the B shape where the volume is secluded to the lower ends of that range that we drew this from. The D-shape, which is the standard, which is simply just everything is balanced and fair. Lower end at the highs, lower end at the lows, but everything's going on in the middle. Then you have the B-shaped, which is kind of shared bias. a lot going on on the top and bottom edges, but the middle is simply inefficient pricing. Okay? And the B shape can come in. It doesn't have to be like two um it doesn't have to just be two crests where there's one c and one crest. It can be another little mountain. Okay? Like up here, you can see there's one mountain, two mountains, and we'll just say like a third mountain here. Okay? Or the main one that our our volume profile is showing us to is this PC, right? Simply if price returns a PC how you want to use it is that any POI within that price will reverse from this point. Okay as you can see price comes in here reverses. Now if you zoom in you'll see that within this there is a another okay area which is just a simplified order block but what you notice is that it is between the PC and the volume area high. Okay, very strong area dips in I mean dips up into there and then retraces downside. Now this is the second retracement model. Okay, here we use our low volume nodes. You can see that actually ignore this low volume node because this low volume area led to no price. You see just a gap. So we emit this. This is a low volume valley as you can see right there. Little B shape going on there. You guys can visualize that. And then here's another one. Obviously, very nice and beautiful. But I I I see it. Okay, you can see right there. But remember, I'm going to show you guys what we're going to do with this. Okay, we are using this for our CIT. Why CIT? Because this is one impulse. So even though there's low volume nodes here, it has to be in context. This will be beyond our optimum zone. This is within our optimum zone. That's why we're using this one instead of these others. Make sense? Good. Okay. And as you can see price extends to the high side. Now with this you can see that a lot of the time price goes from the low volume node in the initial spike. So you can see right here impulse retracement fast impulse. Okay the high the PC nodes as you can see right over here which is all the way down here that happens over a long period of time which is what we call deeper retracement. Okay. this when you're looking long-term view, okay, which I don't really do a lot of the time, but it's good for you guys to know. But for like a CRT, this example would be here's your CRT high, this is your CRT low, and then this is a previous retracement leg. Okay, previous impulse leg that you're using to just identify that price just made a sweep. Will it keep on going lower or will it just push up? Okay, those are questions you ask. That's what the volume profile can answer for you. Okay. And you get your entry here. Entry is based off candle close retracement entry. Bang. Okay. Off the breaker. Now let's look at this in terms of a quick example. So here is our candlestick high and low. Okay. And what you notice that that is also very strong candlestick. Okay. We just click completed ACRT. It's about to impulse. It's about to continue low. Okay. It has about. So what we do is we get our little tool. So from the candle um high to low we have this volume area low volume node okay what is happening price going to come into it okay now the reason we choose this also is because it aligns with our gam box this is the 50% of this candlestick our PC previous candle equilibrium we do not lose above this point the reaction you enter and you're targeting your extensions plain and simple plain and simple. Okay, but there you go. That is the entire context and theory lesson. Now, what we're going to do is I'm going to go on my chart and I'm going to go throw up a few examples just so you guys can see me go through them with you and then I'm going to throw up some live recordings that we personally took in our live community if you guys want access to this. Okay, the resources are all in our description box. Okay, we can firstly get to this entire presentation, okay? is sent directly to your email so you can download it as well as you can book a call with me if anything within it did not make full sense. Let's dive in. Now very first example is a example that many traders could get confused when they start using the system. So I'm going to show you how to dissect it. Firstly looking at our last three to four candles. You can see that they're bullish and they're sort of low volatile. In this scenario you would be thinking CRT for the day but then you look at your 5:00 candle which I use. Now it is very important that you understand the bias behind this. Firstly, this was a 360rt where liquidity is already swept from this kind of high and then price distributed lower which means price is taking up all the liquidity on the upside. Thus, we're only going to continue lower. So, so you are solely using this impulsive bearish candlestick to define your bias all the way to the downside. So this is a CIT trade and as you can see even using the CIT on the daily time frame gets you an 89% win rate when you're going bullishly and in 85% win rate when you are going bearishly and stands the test of time even on the 4hour. Now just to reiterate you want to be using this on UTC minus 4 and once again I am on a charts just to give you guys clarity. Now that you understand that you're using CIT for your bias, because of this impulsive candlestick, you draw your gam box from the low all the way to the high of that candle. Now, you find the gam box once again from your trading side panel all the way at the bottom. And here are my exact settings. Now, at this point, you are simply waiting for price to come into the 25 to.5 level. So you can enter your trade and then target the lower levels. So as you can see I hopped immediately down to the lower time frame. I do not waste any time with any fluff in between. So now that I'm here, you can see that the bias is very clear. It is bearish. So, some of you also have been asking me what are this? What is this indicator that gives me the candlesticks on the side? Well, it is my higher time frame candle overlay power three by the tick magnet. And here are my exact settings I have for it as well as the styling. So pay attention to the price action as well as the current for our candle we are trading. Yes 5:00 the range that we're using and the candle we're using to trade which is 9:00. So we've just gotten into our 25 optimum level. So waiting for a change state. So right over there we have our clear change in state of delivery with a candle close and as well we are coming in to our breaker block area. So now we just need to see bearish action from this area. And there you go. Enter your trade. stop above your 25 level as you can see and you can already see that that for our candle is now rejecting. Now we have our entry and our stop loss in place. We now need to get our TPS which we get from this low, not the 4hour candle low, the lowest point on your chart all the way to your 4hour candle high. And here we can just target the 1.27 two for a simple one to two. So as you can see that simple candlestick got us our bias, it got us our entry, it got us our stop loss, and it got us our TP. Everything was defined to the tea and there's not 15 indicators, not 15 lines that going across my chart. So, as you can see, we now enter the trade. And yeah, at this point in the trade, I'm already off the live stream. You have gone to go get your lunch. You're enjoying some of your family. You're just letting the market do its part now cuz you have already done yours, which is executing. And as you can see, we do end up hitting TP by the time of just before market close. So that is your candle impulse theory. Let's go over one more example. Now, this one is going to be based off CRT. And as you can see, here is just an automated back test on this. 1,400 trades tested with an 84.2% 2% win rate with 1, and 200 of them being winning trades and then 200 being your losses. So now on your far time frame, you want to make sure you have the CRT overlay too by the timeless one on your chart. And then you should get these black lines going across your screen. This simply is allow me to automate my trading. Here are my exact settings, the one, the five, and the 9, but I use the 5:00 candle 90 minute duration. And then here are some of the style changes. Make sure you are adding this on your chart. Pause the video if you have to and then come back. Now that you have this, what you can do, you can even add alerts onto these lines. So that way price whenever it tags these areas, it notifies you. As you can see, I have this already set up. So it even simplifies my shading a lot more and I'm not spending time waiting for price to sweep. I just get an alert on my phone that price has sweeped the far high. And that is when I start to monitor the chart. Okay. My goal is to make your trading a lot simpler and automated and efficient so you can live the life you want to live. Okay. Now that you have everything set out, your bias is the easiest part. Looking at your last 3 to 4hour candlesticks, you can see that they're all indecisive, more wick than body. They are very small. There is bearish, bullish, bearish and bullish and and bearish and then bullish again. As you can see, it is confusing with the market. It is a ranging day. So with this, this finally confirms that we want to use CRT for this day, the candle range theory. You see how simple that was? I didn't scroll all the way to the left and look at the last P or some alltime high. I simply look at what was shown to me because I'm only going to be in the market for the next 10 to 15 minutes. So now you have your 5:00 candle marked out. You then go on the lower time frame and you wait for a sweep. So our bias depends on the sweep. So since we have swept the 4hour high, we now have a bearish buy. So price can take out the liquidity at the lows. If price swept the 4-hour low, we would have a bullish bias and that would also be good because we could continue with that trend which I would prefer. But once again, this is CRT and price is wanting to take out liquidity. So with our entry right here, as you can see, we have firstly our change in state of delivery. Press close below and we have just returned to this breaker block. So now with that being shown, wait for bearish sentiment. Okay, there we go. Enter your trade. Stop just above your CRT high. Or you could place it at all time high of the day over there. Okay, and you target the opposing side of your range. Now once again, take a look at that for our candle. And there you go. price TP. If you wanted to be a bit more cautious with this, you could have actually gone for the 50%. Which is right over here. This one has a high a 100% hit rate of getting hit majority of the time, but this is lows your hit rate by 80%. But you will still end up getting a lot more profits with this. And I prefer this TP instead. Now, let's go over some live trades that I'm going to take the next morning with you guys. Today is actually a CIT. Okay, I was given a bit of fair game to say that it might be in the beginning of the session. So, just quickly recapping today's session. Okay, so premarket was looking um it did show me a bit of bullishness but then I did prefer and prioritize the the 93 sweep, okay, as I usually do, right? But um now as you guys can see it is going bullish right now. Okay, and we're taking that off the CIT now. So you can see here full body candlestick, right? Nails on the 4 hour, but we see we've been bullish since premarket. Okay, so I've been fairly bullish pre-market. So bullish candle, bullish candle, another bullish candle here. Here was the last CRT. This is from uh yesterday. We took out the high, took out the low. We slipped this low point and then now it started going bullish. Okay, so what is this? This is CRT into CIT. Okay, see there CRT making the sweep the final sweep before price starts to get that impulsiveness to go in the opposite direction. Okay, now as you can also see we have our gam box. So we came to the 025 and.5 area our optimum zone there and where we targeting this external high point. Okay, other highs we could look at are Fibonacci. So you know actually could go for a bit more want to go for the max extension but I just aligned with the 1.7 for today. Okay. And also here's another example as well. We did have another pre-market CRT. So yes of this low point price taking that liquidity price sweeping that liquidity igniting it to impulse later on. Okay. Right on the lower time frame. What else did we see? We looked at our volume. Okay. So as always with any CIT we use low volume nodes. Okay. So right here this is the identified low volume node that price has gone off of. Okay. Where did we draw this from? The CRT. not the CFT but the candle low to the candle high. Okay. It's pretty much just this leg over here. Okay. And here you can see here's the high volume area right here. And then we tape off. Okay. Right. Low volume, low volume here. Then we increase volume here as well. Okay. So that relative area. I'm not going to do much positioning with this just yet because I know what time is now. 10:20. We might go up down then up down then up again like how we did on Monday if I'm not mistaken. Monday what we did do was exactly that. Okay, we missed the initial CRT. Okay, with this expansive move here we got over here and then watch price do up down up down up down up down and then literally at 11:30 that's when we finally reach the TP. So the most managing I'll probably do with this is like de-risking but I wouldn't go break even. Not yet because I know we could come back down to the entry point in any time. But entry- wise as well, same entry model we use. So there's the high points, the 93 high. We closed above. We retrace back into this area. Enter. Then we're targeting higher. Okay guys, that's our CIT. It's good practice as well. It's good practice. Okay, we have majority of all our trades the last two weeks have just been consistent CRT trades. Um, which I have taken advantage of. Okay, made some very good money on. But it's also good to see a few CITs as well coming back into into into our arsenal here. Okay. So, let's see. All right. Okay. I'm actually I'm up a good amount here. Wow. Look at S\u0026P. I think SP has a lot more volatility than NASDAQ today. I remember when it did it sweep. It went it went all the way right. It went all the way to the 50% of the ranger. Yeah. Basically, we sweped the high point and then we came to the 0 75 whereas NASDAQ barely missed the 50% there and now this bullish move. I mean definitely do see there's a lot more weight behind S\u0026P's one. Okay, but let's see. We are just itching towards TP here. Um Oh, that that far can is looking juicy. Yeah, it's literally the same for our cand that brought price down. CIT CIT CIT and then price CRT. Now it's CIT CIT CIT. Going to see if we can take out this high finally. And to be fair, there is also a lot of liquidity. I didn't even notice, but there's equal highs here as well. So there's also just like a high value area. I assume price would want to reach. I don't know if we have that also with ES here. No, not really. Not really. Let's see here. Yeah, pretty far from the high here, which could also be interesting cuz if we take out this high here, we kind of have a SMT going on, but I don't know. Okay. Okay, it's nearly 10:30. 10:30 I usually start to lock off. Let's see if we can reach it before 10:30, though. Okay, that's TP. Okay, before 10:30. All right. Okay, guys. Cool. Um, good good stream. Okay, guys. Okay, [cough] so [clears throat] it is 9:44. We done our CRT sweep for the day. Right now, he's looking for extra positions to stack up. Okay, so here's for our candle, the high and the low. And same thing with uh S\u0026P here for high and low. Okay, on the 5 minute, actually on the 2 minute, let's go there. If you take a look at this, what have we done? There's an SMT. Okay, one of them takes the far low point. Okay, of here, one does not take the low. Okay, SMT in terms of our volume. Okay, so we're looking at the pre-market volume from this low to this high. As you can see, where do price go to? It stayed within our highest volume node. [clears throat] Right over here. Okay, once it flipped over there, that was ignition to the upside. Okay, as well as on NASDAQ, same thing. So, either or relatively good. Okay, right now we can just do add on to this retrace onto this push here like that. Okay, to the upside here. Got a lot more room and then just going for these equal highs here. Okay. Uh let's just send that to the community as well. Okay. Yeah. So we see that was the volume node that gave price to move up here. And then here you can see as well same thing here. This is a bit more simplified but same thing once you flipped over that volume node. Okay that's an ignition. Okay. To enter a trade. Now in terms of the second leg here, right? Because we have another leg that price is extending off of taking from this low point to that high. Okay. Right. Where's the volume indicating to this area? Okay. Other zone that price could drop down. So I am expecting this low point here. Okay. That's another low volume know that I could see price return to. And in terms of here, okay, low volume know we already reached into that one. This one right over here. Okay. That aligns with this uh this high point. Okay. So we're just going [clears throat] for a static simple one to one. Okay. Since we did come in here late, just got to be adaptable with it. And I mean, this range could extend. Let's see what the max extension of this range could be. Yeah, that's 214. We are pretty much at the 14 as well. So, I kind of stretching it to be honest. Same thing with the area where I sort of stretching it a bit more. Just check. It's looking pretty good there. Okay. Okay. They're getting a lot more of an aggressive push here on S\u0026P. What time did this happen? Same thing. 9:30. 9:26. Okay, fair. But 9:30 when we actually did the real move. So, same thing. Candlestick, time, volume. That's your golden equation. All right, that's the sweep getting beginning. Let's see if we can reverse back up here. Retesting the the previous volume node. Uh might come into this low volume node and we're going to see how we play out here. Okay, strong re strong rejection after we did the liquidity and still bouncing off the volume node here. So be very interesting. So volume I'm referring to the one from here as well. I can see bang P there. Okay. So, it's like an inverse once again regardless of how good the trade looks. Okay. Always always got to have your your protection. Yep. Yep. Yep. Yep. Morning everyone. So, that's what we're in here. Just trying to get the continuation from the 93 move. Going to trade it to end the session here. And [clears throat] quick recap from the pre-market. So premarket, there's our far kind of high for NASDAQ and our far high for S\u0026P. Hope you guys can see the difference, right? The next candle sweeps the low. The other one does not sweep the low. What does that mean? That's a that's a S\u0026T. Not only that, that is a divergence, okay? upon two correlated assets. We then took a look at our premarket which was our standard range. Okay, so we did know there was going to be a SE on one of these pairs. We don't know which one. Okay, and did we end up getting a perfect sweep on NAS? Okay, we use that knowledge of the sweep in our advantage. Okay, now the timing aspect 93 as always 93 market open. What does price do? Spirals to the opposite of the range. Okay, just like any other day. And then what was our last deviation for this? We needed the volume. So that's why it took the volume from this low point okay all the way to the high and as you can see where is price having the highest amount of volume being traded it's at this PC okay so even once we close this candle within here okay that would be our first entry or when we actually flipped above okay right so these are the prime prime entries okay once again as well NASDAQ above the PC okay we close and below the PC we're buying up. Okay, so these are the prime entries. Right now we're just getting the the scraps. Okay, which are these re-entries. Okay, and I'm basing this off of the PC as well from here. Okay, liquidity that we created here. And just leave some space in case we come back to this low volume node here. Okay, pretty slow though. And yeah. Okay, since this is Monday and is a a re-entry, I am a lower risk than normally, but we're just trying to see if we can get any ranches off of this. Okay, this is what we are doing. We're going to see how this plays out today. TP is just targeting as well these bits of highs here on ES. Okay. And same thing with NASDAQ there some really super highs as well. Okay. There we go. Okay. Um Friday's trade got taken out with a bit of profit. I believe as I said right market close comes we didn't close the trade cuz Friday didn't really have all that volatility and we did see that being played out. Okay. Um and also from just a high high time frame standpoint that liquidity okay that consolidation you guys will see it in the previous um live streams you saw that price considing here and we're looking for price to take out one of these areas okay and you can see that we came all the way to the highs then we reverse back okay what models this is our false break okay and now doing another super reversal to the upside here and let's see how far uh this does reach to okay once Again, I have a major rule. I don't go against the preceding trend. So, I'm only taking this buy because the market has showed me that it wants to be bought out for the buyers today. Okay. If we're still sticking to this bearishness like here, um then the high then lower, then that would be our bearish move for the day. Okay. So, super simple. Okay. Once again, what is our winning formula? Okay, it is our candlestick, our time, and our volume. Okay, right about here, still above. I'm going to probably go and d-risk a little bit because I can see we did not come to this low volume note. Okay, I just want to manage it as well. It is Monday. Um, but I do see a good volatility with NAS. So, that is a good sign here. Okay. [snorts] Does everyone know that we live? Let me just make sure. Listen out. Okay, [clears throat] there you go. There you go. There you go. There you go. there cuz yeah right now since we out of the range okay is fair game okay you got to remember that the range is our environment that we are used to okay everything within here once price made the super K everything is fair game price going to reach the high okay that's our guaranteed spot but going beyond that okay it does become more of the in the uh heart of the market. Okay, you're at it full cuz as well you can see that we just reached as well as our max TP we usually go for for NASDAQ. Okay, so a lot of this is um usually out of our boundaries. Okay, that's I'm being very cautious with this one. Okay, I'm also just doing this in case everyone else maybe missed the initial. I'm pretty sure people should have got this because this was a textbook set up. I think I also spoke about it in announcements as well, you know. So, let's see. We'll see. 10 15 10 \u003e\u003e [clears throat] \u003e\u003e I'll take some time for any questions if anyone has any questions. Okay. Um but yeah, we up an okay amount, right? But yeah, I'm definitely looking forward to this week. a lot of news from going around Dubai on um praise out to them but definitely a lot of volatility um but gold especially especially gold people trading gold um we've seen that transfer from you know the indices from the DXY into gold so that also plays a major part and major role in just these currencies um but you're going to here very expensive for our candle here. Okay, expensive for our range. I am see that we we got a lot of our highs as well. So, it's got this initial one. Okay, from my previous candle and now it's reaching into this little this little gap here. Okay, we did call a little gap uh from Sunday opening new week opening gap here. So that's why we are reaching into here. It's a bit of a weird zone. Do that instead. Okay. I see most of the price wants to reach it instead of you know rejecting from it though. Holding. Okay, we have Biz here. Optimus Pure came in. Okay, Sonia came in. Perfect, perfect, perfect. Okay guys, once again, so as I said guys, I'm really diss on this. Um, it is once again a re-entry. Okay, a re-entry model here. Oh yeah, these are perfect. Very, very good. Surprised no one got into these. I was doing good. Okay. We just bounce up and you might be up by much. Okay. So just bounce up and down here. This also forms our liquid um not our liquidation but our mark cycles impulse manipulation impulse. Okay, guys. Yeah, so this is not one of those very fast trades. As you can see, prices bounce up and down. I'm going to keep you everyone here just to watch this play out. Um, but this is probably the only I'm going to get. I'm probably going to let this go since it is Monday. I can get a go to at least the new position unlike the Friday trade. Just going to know probably leave it overnight if I really need to, but I doubt it's going to take that long honestly. But can't give updates on it. We just sweeping our liquidity and going higher. Sweeping liquidity and going higher. Um, okay. One more check for any questions. Hopefully everyone's good. Everyone's good. That's a good start to the to the week though. Okay. Definitely a lot more C's coming through. CIT is definitely with all the voltage there is um within this week. Also, if you guys want since it's a very high heavy news week, I do recommend everyone does uh you know try and look into a lot more other enhanced news events. I think I'll show you guys one that will be good for you guys. Um, gluten. Yeah. Here we go. Okay. So, I'll show you this before we wrap up for the day. Okay. Hope you guys can see that. But here you go. See? Blint. just giving up [snorts] uh very recent news events. As you can see, this one's about Iran. Okay, so you guys should just know the basics. Okay, something bad's happening here. I mean, one economy just know it's going to have an inverse correlation on the opposing one. Okay, very gold and DXY. Be checking on that. Okay. Um but as yet, there's all the news that you guys can keep up to up to date with. Okay, so yeah, glint.trade trade for everyone that is interested. Okay, but on that note, I think I'm going to wrap up today and I'll see you guys tomorrow. Okay, cheers everyone. Enjoy the rest of your day. So, as you can see, that trade also full TP and as always send out the Discord and documented that we played it all the way to the final TP. And I mean like this is some days after but you can just see day after day the black lines of the far can that I trade. CIT day TP CRT day TP CIT day TP another CIT TP into CRT and there we get one loss. The next day I think it took a TP on ES if I'm not mistaken the next day. But you can see here some more TPS but you guys get the idea. You guys see all the live executions or using a single candlestick continuation day candle impulse theory and then ranging day candle range theory. Okay, you can see here there's more TPS with ES here and all of this is in our Discord. Okay, so here we go. The trade from Discord was a inner play. So I didn't want to record too much of my audio cuz it's kept it for them. Um but yeah, CRT sweep then liquidation model we're going upward here and not too much context from volume. Yeah. Yeah. I mean like look at this. Yeah, I could say the volume area low but it's a range regardless. So obviously there's going to be that volume area within there. Okay, let's see. Trying to do everything super fast here. my other side. Now I see how the trade plays out throughout the day and yeah, it's pretty good. It's pretty good. Okay, pretty good. So, I'm going to quickly over with you guys so you guys get a full idea of it. Okay, so we're pretty much sitting on the live stream for a lot of time. Okay, we're just waiting, waiting, waiting. But um this is simple 4 hour. Okay, so 4, what was our 4 hour showing us? Okay, so you guys watch all the other lessons. We're looking at our market structure. Okay, our mark structure is built off our candlesticks and our candlesticks are telling us that it's bullish, bullish, bullish, bullish, bullish. Okay, here we're looking at candle behavior. What's price doing here? It's slowing down. What does that mean? It's ranging. Okay, so using the candle range theory and want to be bullish with the candle range theory. Okay, so that's antibbias. Okay, so we're going to be going to upside using the CRT as our strategy. Okay, entries was on the 2 minute pretty much waiting from 9:30 until 103. Okay, which is my usual cut off time. Okay, but right here this is some of the liquidation models. Okay, liquid at the highs, liquid at the lows. Okay, we get our sweep at what time? We got our sweep right over here. The first one is is is at 10:00. The second one is at 10:08. Change their delivery, break a block, we enter on the close. Okay. Right. And now we're just targeting firstly the CRT high and our Fibonacci extensions. Okay. If you guys watch the course, you guys should be inclined with that. So, we're going to see how that trade plays out. And as you can also see, it was already sent out to our disc. We had like a full on thing where we're just like with everyone just waiting, waiting, waiting, waiting for this setup. I mean, yeah, the bias is pretty much predetermined as you can see. Yeah, we're all waiting. Literally, that sweep is the that's happening right now. There's the same red line going upward and then the same red line also as we didn't really get. But yeah, everyone is watching and having the same bias, which is good cuz we the same candle. So, we should all be having the same bias. Okay, but um yeah, here we go. It's going to tell them to like dus because we are um pretty much at the 50% of 50% of the range. Let me see how it plays out. I'm going to go gym get my launch and adios amigos just to notify the discord that we have reached the CRT higher which is good. Now we're going for extra bit of profit and price g that's good. It doesn't perfect. We have fully uh managed our risk, taken our profits and now we let price do the rest of the thing. We execute on the plan. The main thing we execute on the plan the plan we saw from like the beginning of the stream. Price is still consoliding all the way over here. Executed all the way till now and now we see that volatility at what time? It's 10:30 usually end of my live stream. So today was one of the long live streams. So at 9:30 and at 10:30 and I stuck through them, stuck through with them. That's how we got our entry. That's the main goal. Once we get our entry, then we let the market do its part. I'm really supposed to be at the gym right now. Yes, we had a bit of upside potential. Then we were brought back off to reach our highs here. So, I'm just going to assume that we want to be bearish for the rest of the week. Yeah. So, we do get a sweep of these highs, which we do seem like we are out to over here. We also swiped the highs on NASDAQ. pretty good to target lower. Let's see. Let's see what time is. Is it still 9:40? Yeah. Quickly go over for our candles as well. for our candle what we're following. Still the same volatility, still range like conditions all throughout. The immediate trend is sort of still shared here because we are still bullish, but we definitely lost a lot of volatility. Yeah, all we did was come up to those equal highs and we just start rejecting. We didn't even take out the the massive high here. It'll be quite interesting to see what we do today. Be very interesting. Yeah. Seems still very strongly bullish. All right, this is probably news 83 news. That's good. I have arranging Tell us about the model you were want to trade. \u003e\u003e Yeah. So, I'm still using CRT, but we still ranging um in our week here. So, like last time, what we did what we did yesterday was that price is ranging. So we're expecting range like conditions fort which driver actually saw that yesterday it was a double sweep right I mean here it is okay this already an A+ setup okay because of the false break and everything right we served here then I think at um 130 p.m. and then we reverse back down. So this to me already show that this is a very range like market. Okay, cuz usually after a C like this price will continue in that direction for probably the next day. But the fact that we came back down probably shows that um price wants to continue this range. Okay, so as you can see right here we continue the range and here we currently are. Um a good thing is that we have taken out we have not taken out the high on ES but we have taken out the high on NASDAQ. So we do also have a SMTCRT as well. So \u003e\u003e that's correct. There's also a little bit liquidity above and there's a third value gap also. So I was looking at that and I was trying to get your uh how do you call this? your um volume profile and now we are at the volume profile high if I'm \u003e\u003e okay \u003e\u003e I don't know if I'm used to but try to \u003e\u003e yeah yeah definitely good good okay um sort bias is bullish right or \u003e\u003e uh yeah it's bullish but \u003e\u003e okay \u003e\u003e yeah that was my question \u003e\u003e okay good \u003e\u003e that was my third my third evil this week. \u003e\u003e Oh, okay. Um I mean it's good to have that as well. I do see it happen. I'm just looking at yesterday cuz um has had the chance to go full bully bullish. It just failed to do that. So I don't know maybe I don't know what NASDAQ's plan is. It's stay below this lower high here. That's what I'm looking at. So but I do like this chain stage here in a few of these things. \u003e\u003e Might not come below the 50% I will finish. \u003e\u003e Good, good, good. Wait for this kind of closure. Then I'll probably hop in to a quick little short. We saw how long that lasts for just to follow main CRT rules, right? CRT sweep. Um I mean also from a standpoint of the candlestick as well. The thing is if if if this was a very good impulsive candlestick, right? And then I probably would have had more also CIT to probably the upside. But I'm also looking at the candlestick as well. It's bearish. There's a lot of wick on either side. So, this is also a very neutral candlestick, right? So, there's a lot of pre-market range being created here. I'm just seeing prices trying to sweep out now. That's I'm looking at this right now. \u003e\u003e Then there's liquidity above and below. So, \u003e\u003e yeah, on both sides. So in these days I'm just like going mainly with CRT until you know \u003e\u003e [snorts] \u003e\u003e um really see this. So there's a very interesting gap by price here. This little Trump gap very interesting. Usually price revisits these areas. We haven't done that yet. Okay. Well, see this kind of closure what this one does. It's about 4 3 seconds. Still close above our CRT high. I'd want something a bit more volatile. But I'm still dead. When are you looking to enter? \u003e\u003e Uh not yet. \u003e\u003e Okay. Okay. Good. I was looking at the previous day high or previous day low as target. \u003e\u003e There's no clear draw now. \u003e\u003e For me. \u003e\u003e Yeah. Is about in between day. \u003e\u003e Yeah. This morning I took shorts on and that went well. \u003e\u003e Oh yeah. Oh, you know then you know you're stressed then cuz you made your money for the day. Yeah, I did. But I need I I need a little bit to buff my 30 mil. \u003e\u003e Oh, okay. Perfect. Okay, I see. See, see now that's good then. Um, it's good good hunger. \u003e\u003e And I love it when you are telling us how you see the markets. \u003e\u003e Yeah, I know. Let's see. \u003e\u003e But I think a short is a I'm trying to find like a trade from back back somewhere where we might have had similar conditions. So that's what I'm looking out for right now. Just scrolling through my journal. There's so many. But this this kind of close like this. I'm probably going to just jump in just to just add idea to the SMTCRT um the false break as well that's going on and then I'll see how price reacts to that as well. Just quickly try and open my other stuff here. Right. Where are we? Snazz. Okay, cool. So, I'll just quickly hop in here. Let's see how the first trade of the day goes here. Stop just above there. And then I'll take a just to the lows. What's that? \u003e\u003e I was just waiting to get inversion of the 50 minute care. It's getting rejected to the middle. \u003e\u003e Yeah. To this the most. I'd also look here on the two minute. I'll probably just get like um what I call this like a rebalancing like bearish feedback similar to what we did yesterday, right? just got a bit of bullish feedback from the breaker block with this wick as soon as bullish and I entered with that be like the last thing I'll probably get in. Um I'm already like loading up stuff on my SL and everything. See potentially I want to get this high. See cannot see this kind of closes a short candlestick at all. 953 please. Not a major time. Sit down. 930. Okay, let's see. 93 sweep, right? So, price took a bit of time, but I like there still 93 sweep that we had presented. Okay. So, this is some sort of bearish action from here. See, I'm see. Yes. Yes. Yes. So confused. What did I send there? Oh, okay. Really bearish off that level yet. [snorts] Let's see. Let's see. Lot of consolidation going on here. I'm not too mad about Yeah. Okay. Um, this one as well. See you waving up and down there. That's ESG still in below that. Okay. We're just in that area right Now we're just waiting for bearish action out of this this break for this inversion. There's a new candle open in two minutes. So \u003e\u003e yeah, \u003e\u003e if you know that, are you going in or are you staying awake for first few minutes? \u003e\u003e I mean, for me, what do you mean? Like a new bargain or \u003e\u003e Yeah. In two one minute there's new candle open. So, um, most of the time I look where the wicket is going to form and then go in and not at the minute of switching hour. \u003e\u003e I mean, the thing with this one is I think you only Yeah, guys, you probably what 10:00 maybe. This one really switch to 9. I was probably only going to have the next F candle in 3 hours. So, I guess the only thing I really look at right now is um is any common entry signal that I could use? Because like with this, remember this is I'm on a Wanda. You have probably 10:00 candles. I have 9:00 candles, right? So, I don't have anyone opening yet. That's I'm just kind of waiting now. \u003e\u003e Yeah. another one. \u003e\u003e Mhm. Yeah. So that's probably why but that's actually a good idea to like have that um there's also the reason why even I it also has to do with the market open but it's also the reason why I don't trade like exactly at 9:00 even though the 9:00 candle opens you know on the dot 9:00 I only like look at it at 9:30 right 3 minutes after main because of the market open but also because a lot of the time there's no real received before that time. So I mean that's something I'm going to apply. We haven't got any reaction yet. So still waiting. This is super interesting. I don't think I'm going to enter anything to the upside here. I don't really know how I do that. I don't want to immediately go CIT as well. See, I mean, I'll probably I'll watch for them for a few more minutes, but if that hike gets validated, I don't really see myself entering anything else or trying to enter new positions and Same. Are you still bearish? \u003e\u003e I'd want to be, but right now that bullish candlestick is not really helping out. \u003e\u003e No, you stopped out. \u003e\u003e No, I didn't get in. I didn't get in yet. \u003e\u003e I understand. Yeah, I was waiting for this to give me some sort of real bearish reaction out, but then it didn't give me one. So, I'm just waiting now. Now, it might get bearish. Is this a nice wick on the 5 minutes? \u003e\u003e You see a wick on the five minute on um \u003e\u003e Yeah, just just forming for now. If it goes bearish, \u003e\u003e I think we can go in. \u003e\u003e Okay. I mean, um, \u003e\u003e the only thing I'd see myself the only procedure I'll take um to get back doing bearish is if price takes out this low, then I'll take this now just a structural point. Um, but then besides that, I'm just kind of just watching what price is going to do today really. took all liquidity above. So Yeah. Yeah. \u003e\u003e Three little Indians on the left side. \u003e\u003e Is it three little Indians? \u003e\u003e Yeah. \u003e\u003e Oh, okay. That is like a candlestick pattern. Yeah, it's it's like a tree on the left side like up down up down up down and then reverse. \u003e\u003e I actually haven't heard of that one. No, it does sound interesting. \u003e\u003e It's not taken that high. So, and if you look at the aggression of the candle, it's almost the same. If you look at the one hour, it's three times aggression up. I mean, the only the only bullish I would see though is a 159, the 1:00 candle by the five and then 9 distributes to the posing side. That would be the only one, but I really don't really pay attention to that. I'm mainly just focusing on the 5:00 a lot of the time. But um I trade London up. I trade London down. 24hour \u003e\u003e uh CRT also. \u003e\u003e Oh, was Natly, was it you or Nath that needed needed to get the $1,000 for? \u003e\u003e Yeah, it wasn't that straight. Yeah, because I'm pretty sure that was cuz you guys gone cuz think you guys predetermined that bias way before it happened. We just had to like wait an hour to get it in. But I was like, \\\"Okay, they probably made um a good amount of that one cuz I think that was like a one to three \u003e\u003e and I really go for high Rs.\\\" But then that one was just sort of like it was good entry and then also good TP as well cuz we pretty much just got out at the exact wick \u003e\u003e before price started to reverse in the in the morning or the next day. \u003e\u003e It was perfect. There was a change in state and then we get in. \u003e\u003e Yeah. Yeah. I mean literally when when we had that false break and then this is just a it's a picture perfect model as well like those \u003e\u003e now it looks better on the 5 minutes. \u003e\u003e Yeah, I'm also looking at this candlestick just tapering off the wick here. Um \u003e\u003e getting closer to what this previous kind of high point. Let's see also SNP has also done this cheap. Okay. It's not my ideal scenario. I saw for the morning. \u003e\u003e No, \u003e\u003e I'm just really curious on want to see what price wants to do today. Just very curious. See I mean even on the 1 hour we also indecisive as well. Now I have this new bearish opening [snorts] this new bearish opening. I don't have a suspicion, but I can only confirm it after probably this weekend's to collect some data on this week. Then I'll see if I can confirm my suspicion. \u003e\u003e If it's closed bearish, we can get in. \u003e\u003e I guess the good part is now I guess that S\u0026P has also swed a high point. So at least now they pretty much aligned. Um it's the most I'd see from this. See you. \u003e\u003e [clears throat] \u003e\u003e Let's see. Let's see. Oh I do. I'm watching for price close the 5 minute per value gap of step so we can trade what you're thinking if it's a 159 at 50 minutes. Let me take a look. Let me take a look here. Probably is. Yeah, there's three sick forming here. I want price to go back down here though. Yeah, \u003e\u003e cuz honestly it does. \u003e\u003e Yeah. See what I'll target. I like this. The odds are that these are very good projections. Take a look at S\u0026P 2. Let me give it some attention as well. But um SMT Let's see come back down which is good. I don't know confusing me in the first half. Where is it? Where is it going to? Why is it trying to be bullish? It's 10:15 up. Hopefully, we do get something cleaner by 10:30. Okay, close below the low point. It's nearly 103. [snorts] Would you give your in close below you? see a lot more potential going positive. So yeah, let's see and close them. Think I'll move my stop maybe just to there. And yeah, that's pretty much about it. Okay, false break. Let's see where to close. Okay, I mean definitely price is respecting here. It's kind of weak closure there. But yeah, you know, I'm probably going to still keep around the same entry areas. It's just they got delayed now. But yeah. Oh, there we go. I'm in. So Christ does pretty well. It's pretty good here. All right. as always. Okay, there you go. Gone super late there, but it's okay. Um, that's what I'm standing with. We'll see how price plays on um with this. But that's the entry for the day, guys. It took a while, but it's alo interesting. I'm starting to see a lot of entries at 10:30. I'm not sure why. Maybe daylight savings, but I'm just taking know, as I said, I'm going to wait for a week to really publish that data, but I'm still going to be assuming that 93 is the main sweep time. 93 was a bit more manipulative today. Yeah, we actually got a full candle closure. So, yeah, I have no excuse um with not entering this trade. CRT false break. Um all in all pretty good price was shared between bullish and bearish. Trash price was bearish. We follow bearish. Um entry 103. I'm okay with the time actually 10:28. So around number. But yeah guys going to go go ahead and get my lunch. I know these streams are getting a lot longer. I'm not used to it also. But got wait for price here. Everyone happy? Everyone good? \u003e\u003e Thanks sir. \u003e\u003e Thank you Denise. Thank you Jeans Jerry Odette Pier day guys. So we did reach our low at this point. Obviously that is our full TP but just parting out here but position is later on. So as you can see full TP we had our CRT high changing state entry or break block and then we continued to talk lower and as always it was sent out to the Discord right there. There you go. Full TP. Here we go. It is market open. And what do we have? We see we have our 93 sweep and we immediately have gotten that reversal. Okay. So, going to go ahead and enter our trade over here and we'll be targeting the opposing side of this range. This a bit of a late entry, but it's okay. Let me send this to the community. Um right here. Okay. But let's see how this trade plays out. Looking for us to reach the posing side of our range here. Okay. For a quick one to one trade. Okay guys, once again trade. Price did move a bit faster than usual. So going to take advantage of that. Once again, just to recap, this is our previous 4 candle, high point and low point. We then hop down to our lower time frame. We get our sweep at what time 93 and now we get our entry based off the changes state. Okay, so this kind of close above this kind we're actually entering on enter over here. Well, we just take this as a secondary change state for the day. So, let's see how the trade plays out. Okay, so we pushing off the rally again. Okay, there you go. TP hit. Okay, let's update this to the Discord. entry, stop loss and TP. As you guys can see, trade taken and it's just about to hit the TP on my broker as well. So, going to let that one play out. Okay, but TP once again and I think it should have triggered now. As you can see right there, guys, there's the full kiss candlestick. Price took the low and went directly back up to the highs. Do this every single morning. And if you don't believe me, you can literally go on to your chart and then just back test this on the last few days. You can see here low swift price to the highs and then once again price came to the lows then went back up to the highs and then once again even the prior day price came to the high first and then went to the lows. Okay, one candle is what I need. Now once again if you guys want the live access to the direct webinar I will be doing this uh coming few days on going into depth with this entire strategy as well as the different ones I use on different type of market conditions. Make sure that you do apply for the webinar which will be in the link in description as well as you will get access to a free strategy call where I look into your system. what are you doing wrong right now and what can you work to improve to reduce your learning curve and have the time that it takes you to actually reach your profitability. Uh so yeah this is my changing state. Okay as you can see price kind of close above that high point and that is my usual entry. Okay, this is what I'm saying. This will be my usual entry once price closed here that's enter my trade and then I'm targeting the highs. Okay, stop below that candle um that made the break. Okay. But as you can see, just out of pure um consequence today, I only entered after this kind of closed over here. Okay. Right. Okay. Um still an okay ratio. Talk to the high and low point. Okay. That was the very first trade. So as you can see um very fast, very fast move. Yeah. Very very fast move. Okay. And actually very very fast even for Friday. Usually Friday is a lot slower. Um that's also very surprised by today's vol. I don't really check if there's any news. Maybe that might be the case. Um yeah, just have just have a look if there's any news cuz maybe that's why usually Friday is just like it's to end off the weekly candlestick. So there's usually like an end of week um just consolidation on Friday. Um we don't really have this much volatility, but it worked in my favor. So I'm not complaining. I'm not complaining at all. Um, magnet manufacturing. Okay. Okay. Yeah, I think it was just starting to prep up right now. It was just prep up. Maybe that's why. Um but yeah, so as you can see here, we hit uh the first TP very relatively quick over here. Okay, re-entries. I would have taken it probably from here, this FG, but then that's pretty much my same entry point. So I don't really reenter here. Okay, now you should also seen this in the Discord as well. Um yeah, that was the first trade that was at 9:46. So right after the news event Mr. T just mentioned. And then this is the second one which is exactly 10 a.m. Okay. When we hopped on um right over here, price retrace a bit into this order block. Okay. And I've noticed a lot of the time that price usually gives us like one last exhaust um after we make the initial sweep. Okay. So here's the initial sweep. We reach the opposing side of range. Okay. That's our first trade done. Okay. Right. Um but today was actually very good coincidence because we was actually able to scale up. Now, if you guys have done your lessons on market cycles, you would know why this was a good re-entry point. Okay? So, let me actually find the lesson so you guys can watch it after in case you haven't. It is. Scroll up here. It's in legacy course. It's in the very beginning. Reversal triggers, enhanced vers structure. Where is market cycles? Oh, yeah. It is. Okay. Yeah. Market cycles. Okay. Um, you can check it in the or you can just go to the discord. It should have been on the 7th of January and then this where we explain. Okay. Right. Um, so all this laid down into it was an impulse right into a retracement and then usually price once price has done this it immediately goes into a brand new impulse. Okay. This is why I was anticipating that we're going to have this very strong move. Okay. Right. And I literally only kept it I think to this high just above this high this last um pre-market high point and then I was done. Okay. And you can see this also as well it finished within how long? 2 minutes. Yeah. So like literally 9:58 and then 2 minutes was it was done like super fast um move over here. Okay. So yeah these are two um Yeah. Go ahead. \u003e\u003e [snorts] \u003e\u003e Yeah. Yeah. Oh, okay. It's the one I use. There's a video in the in the uh link course as well where I explain all my What is going on today? There's so many gaps up and down. also gapped up here. Um, that's weird. 10. So, what do you mean? You couldn't find this. Yeah. That's the one. Yeah, that's the one I use. So, you can see here it is as well. Um, this is the original one I have here. See? Yeah. I don't know if that's I don't want to take you want to take a screenshot or um Okay, cool. Go ahead. Go ahead. Boom. Could I hold that longer? Okay. You know, I'm going to complain. It's Friday anyway. [clears throat] Yeah. Actually, you got it. Okay, perfect. Um, Chris, so to be fully honest with you, um, that also surprised me as well. I don't usually see this gap. Um, that's why I was actually quite intrigued by it. The only time I see a gap like this is um from Sunday to Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. market open sometime, but mainly Sunday to Monday open um for the new week or when it's like FOMC like a really major news event then I'll see like maybe a massive gap up. Um but usually just something just a form of candlestick. This is a really weird one cuz I don't really see NASDAQ do this and that's usually a very clean chart clean chart especially they're very um static data. It's not like if um FXM or you know in Q where it might just gap up some times randomly but um yeah I'm also quite intrigued by it. I think that Pier I think Pier though got a better entry than me. I think he did get a bit entry. Yeah, he got in at like the peak of the the price making that low point. Yeah, this is the the most ideal entry um that I wanted to get also. I don't know. I just got in a bit later than usual today. But also him as well. Same trade. Um I don't know live stream today. Maybe he made his money and he's like he's like he's good. Well done. Um no he's he's he's a super guy. Oh, okay. I mean, no, no, it's good. It's good. Literally, uh, what does that do to you now? It gives you tangible experience that you've seen from yourself. It's not just hearing it from me. Um, you put it into, you know, remember we had that conversation where it's it's a belief system. Um, like having someone else's will impose onto you. You're not going to easily accept that unless you see it for yourself, right? So just take it as that right. So you you you got the data for yourself. Okay. And they just I mean it's been happening this entire week like also what it was uh the previous day as well Thursday did the same thing swift the low came to the highs um then also reverse back down previous as well the low went to the highs high low you know and you just keep on I mean you know there's only so much I can say but um yeah guys very very fast. Yeah, you can get this on on on Trading View. Every everything here um literally once again, let me just um re synize this. Yeah, CRT overlay 2 by the timeless one and then it will pop as the CRT Pro Plus. Uh the one I use for these candlesticks on the side is called uh TTM ATF candle overlay power three by the tick magnet. I don't know I don't know if you guys want to take like screenshot of this but remember uh there is a video where like I explain all the settings and everything for yall. Good, good, good, good, good. Mhm. Good. Yeah. No, we're just going to have to let me actually implement this um for you so that your trust look um very similar to mine. But um I don't think I'm going to take any more trades today, guys. Though this might reverse, though. Let's see. It might do like a a double sweep. But here's what I um confirm is a double sweep. We're um going towards New York PM session. So, this is like 11:30, 12, 12:00 p.m. Um price has to reverse in the posing direction again. Um but yeah, I don't want to get too greedy. It's probably going to be very early market close today. So I think I just take my profits and leave really. Mhm. Mhm. Yeah. No, definitely. I mean I think Steph explains to you but um you know you learn you learn curriculum then you go through the you get your growth tracker as well. Um the growth trackers where we actually take it analyzes all the common mistakes that you would make and then now since it's it's not just you generally you have like a second pair of eyes you kind of feel a sense of responsibility right to not try and make those same mistakes. And then like we also give you feedback on okay what you could have done right you know and that also just like once again helps that belief system right because it's all about to me it's just literally all about perspective and everyone sees the market a different way um but once you come rectifying them on certain things they they start like saying okay you know what it's not just me looking at my account right now I have responsibility to other people as well so I want to actually make the best decision as possible you know um and then yeah becomes like just smooth saving from Okay guys, but very good, very good stream, guys. Um, everyone enjoy the rest of your weekend and I'll see you guys next week. Uh, yeah, as you can see, that was cool with the students as well. And we took a second trade as well that OCTP. So, this was 10 a.m. just a continuation of this one of the other models we use. And as you can see, that as well ran up to our TPS right here. Bit of a late entry, but that's all right. Uh, as you guys can see, already sent out to the Discord. Looks like all our trades, it's already sent out. Yeah. So, now we'll see what price does. So what are we doing here for our candle low and high points that's our range we stepped at what time 93 candle close above enter now targeting just above the range and we do see pre-market liquidity as well being swept equal here taken out as well some liquidity here so we get these highs as well there. There's no diverge though. So pretty much the only thing we don't have is trade TP trade from the other day TP webinar trade TP. So we're pretty good now for the week. executing the same thing again today. I have no experience for this trade. What if it does do okay? Still good set up though. Okay, that's the C high reached. and that's TP and a $3,000 in what? 30 minutes. Less than 3 minutes. Done. Same model from yesterday, from the previous day, from previous week, from last year. Just executing victory of excuses. Okay. Market open. Let's see. I do expect a CIT. Okay. So, I'm in between a little CIT or CRT here cuz I'm looking at this little very bullish that previous candlestick here and looking at 930 here with the SMT. Then also build that liquidity lying at the highs here. I'm not I haven't seen anything like a good entry yet, but I definitely do see this high getting taken um today, especially how price is moving. We have a little partial liquidation this low point. Let's see when price wants to reverse back up. Let's see where we are. Just above 50% chance. You're still wicking around. I recover from mistake. Good sell off but no um bullish trading. \u003e\u003e Yeah. and Alex pretty stuck really. Um definitely one of the longer ranges I've seen on a pair been trapped in here. I'm seeing a bit of slowmoving consolidation here as well in this area. You can have a good sleep going to the town. See what price gives us. \u003e\u003e [singing] \u003e\u003e It's also Friday, so we could see a Friday reversal as well for the weekly candle. Very strange. Very strange. Okay, I am solidly in those. So, Friday brings either way. Good [clears throat] week. Potentially the last day of the week. Unless there's something better right after. Yeah, these these are some still the same one I was talking yesterday. Same thing also on S\u0026P. Um, see there pretty volatile. Okay, apologies about that guys. I had to go source a few things. Not looking too good here on this buy. All right, let's go and move for CRT here. Let's see here. \u003e\u003e Were you in Fox? \u003e\u003e Yeah, I literally entered. I had to go sort out something real quick. So, coming back to Jordan is not always the best feeling. \u003e\u003e But um \u003e\u003e No, but there was news at 3 of at 5:00 a.m. So, \u003e\u003e yeah, I see openings. I'm just actually looking at right now. \u003e\u003e Yeah. \u003e\u003e 10 a.m. \u003e\u003e Yeah. So, that's why it's moving that way. I wasn't in because of that. \u003e\u003e Good job. Let's see here. \u003e\u003e Let's look more bearish now. \u003e\u003e A lot more bearish. \u003e\u003e The high. \u003e\u003e I might reposition myself over here to be on the lows here. Very sweet here. You know, I read the reaction to at least reach these highs. It's unfortunate, but let's see. A good amount of draw down. See what Friday has to bring. I mean, bearish changing states would happen from this is the only recent low point. But when I go bearish, I'll probably look at uh ES at breaking this low and then I could get in a bearish shot here to downside. I'm not too stressed here. But yeah, definitely definitely been has been a very interesting week. Um been seeing the daylight change a lot of the times. I'm seeing nothing is not as is not as u impactful as well as like last week ago like last week. So I'm also noticing that journing all that. Um and I've seen a lot of my other entries have been at 10:30. fact. See It was before the open. Was it took out a high then the low but then rejected? \u003e\u003e Yeah. Yeah. The high and the low. Yeah, that makes sense. \u003e\u003e Yeah. \u003e\u003e We at this low on ES double rejection. Get a closer. Let's get closer. Okay. Yes. I close here on this break. If this 5 minute candle close, it's a bullish SMT with ES. \u003e\u003e I don't know. I'm liking ES's little bearish bearish um closer though. \u003e\u003e Yeah, there. But I mean an SMT with in a candle close if it's closed like this. \u003e\u003e Oh, okay. Yeah, true, true. Yeah, these lows are \u003e\u003e they disjointed right now. \u003e\u003e Yeah, it's a bullish SMT. They're one closed below or wicked below and the other one doesn't. \u003e\u003e It's been there's two actually. There's one bullish SMT over here and then the other one over here as well. I have another printing That's a green light. Yes. I think this is the last one for the day. I think that's about it then. I think that's about it. Okay, I'm already knocked out of NAS. My broke actually kicked me out of NASDAQ. So now I'm just looking at ES just to base your team to these lows here. In fact, how far price could go be there? 27 Okay, 10:20. That's the last intro of the week. I'm going to wrap it up here, guys. Um, overall though, good week. one no trade day. Um, good sells, good buys also on NASDAQ and then yeah, hopefully that's so good. Still maintaining this. cuz I don't like this maintenance blue here, but I do like the clothes on ears. Okay, guys. All good. \u003e\u003e Thanks, folks. Have a nice weekend, W. \u003e\u003e All right, guys. Enjoy everyone. See you guys next week. So, peace out. Now we and that is the full TP done and dusted.
