So if you guys have any questions feel
free to drop them in the chat. I'm going
to move through this whole keynote and
then at the end I share a strategy with
you as always. I think it will be a very
interesting session because we're going
to talk about prop firms how to get
funding and also my overall journey
towards profitable trading and how you
can use profactus to reach that. So
Profactus AI first of all what is it?
What is our mission? Well, simplifying
automated trading for everyone is our
goal. Why we started this company. But
what is Profactus AI? Well, real quick,
it's the easy tole learn no code builder
to automate any trading strategy
allowing everyone to trade FX, crypto,
and stocks uh automatically. So, with
algorithms, but without having to code.
So we built a no coding platform for
every trader to just automate your
trading plan and then use it in the
markets to stay consistent and be
consistent while you work out, while you
sleep, while you do whatever you want to
do during the day, your trades are taken
and managed. So I always have this
statement, if you were trading for a
living tomorrow, you use perfect AI. And
what I mean with that is is to figure
out, okay, how can you really achieve
your goal with trading? And when I
started 10 years ago, my goal was to
live from this, be independent, be a
trader, make money from the markets. And
that's why I started learning this
skill. And I think if you master
Proactors AI, the software platform,
then you can reach this goal. And I'm
going to dive into that. Why? Let's
break it down. The goal, the method, and
the metrics, the three steps to take.
The goal first is becoming free,
independent, making return on your
capital, maybe reach financial freedom
or whatever it is. That was my goal and
I think it's very similar to the goals
you guys have. The method is having a
profitable strategy and how to know that
the strategy is profitable is by testing
it and seeing results in the live
markets but also seeing results in your
back test. So you need a strategy that
worked last year the year before that
but also that works this year right that
is how I define a profitable strategy.
So that's the method to reach this goal.
But what are the metrics? And the
metrics are often forgotten. And this is
where the journey of every trader comes
down to executing the strategy
perfectly. I can give you the most
profitable strategy on earth. But still,
because some trades happen while you
sleep, some trades happen while you're
just not at the charts or you're
emotional and you don't execute the
trades. Those are all reasons why you're
not reaching this goal. So, Pracus AI is
built to help you find those profitable
strategies, but also execute them
without error. And that's the goal of
also this call and every call we do
every month is to help you find those
strategies, build those strategies, test
them to see for yourself that they work
and then you can reach your goal that
you well you started trading for, right?
So to go back if you were trading for a
living tomorrow you use profactus AI
this every time I share this statement
just think about the goal the method and
the metrics. All right. So, I'm
currently uh standing to the right
there. You can see that they upgraded
the screen. But here you can see I'm
standing here on the trading floor and
this is the history of this trading
floor. And why this is important is
because to the left you see a lot of
chaos, a lot of people standing here,
these desks like this all this wasn't
there, right? You can see that a screen
didn't exist. And why I'm telling that
is because here in Amsterdam uh in the
17th century it all started. uh we in
Amsterdam the people living here
invented the stock market the first uh
company and when that happened also
price action was discovered right prices
move and therefore technical analysis
was used by people here already hundreds
of years ago and some people still trade
like the same technical analysis from
back then right so that was the first
invention then the second invention was
um the computers existed right market
data exploded there were more companies
like that first uh stock market company
that just went more and more and more
companies and therefore there was so
much data uh creating a tech revolution
and human beings couldn't really handle
it so it had to be automated then we had
the next invention and that was PCs this
allowed data analysis beyond human
capacity this is where the Jim Simons
like the the billionaire hedge fund
manager that started with automating
technical analysis started that During
this time when PCs existed or started to
uh pop up everywhere, the professionals,
the hatchants started to automate what
manual traders were doing and this was
gamechanging. This literally created
billionaires u in our industry in the
trading and investing space. Then the
next invention was the internet and the
internet created market access for
everyone. You and me, we're not talking
through the internet, right? But also I
can access my broker account and every
financial market through the internet
now by my phone, by my laptop. And this
changed everything like even more data,
more people could trade, more volume,
more liquidity, markets became safer and
better uh and easier to to trade. And
then right now, where are we currently?
Well, you can call this more or less the
cloud and the AI um period. You can
automate anything. You can test it. You
can trade it and you can get funded. And
this is uh ridiculous that we are so
lucky that we're now able to trade in
this time, right? It is never it has
never been easier to automate anything,
test it if it really works, to trade it,
to access the markets, and also how to
get funded. Back in the days, it was
super hard to uh to get funding and get
money to trade with, right? So how I
define a modern profitable trader is
someone that moved through these five
steps. Study the basics of analysis.
This can be technical analysis. This can
be fundamental analysis. Doesn't really
matter. But at least you know the basics
of the markets. If you don't, there's so
much information online about the
basics. What is a pip? What is what is
trading? How to buy and sell? How to
work with a broker. Right? That's step
one. I think most of you guys here are
well past that step one. But some of you
guys are stuck at step two and that is
the skill of automation. Uh back in the
days you had to become a developer,
learn to code for many years and then
you were able to automate a strategy.
Still it took you a lot of time and
hours and months or years even to
automate one strategy. But now we teach
you guys the skill or offer you a
platform where you can learn the skill
to automate your trading plan without
writing any code. So you can build way
quicker. you can instead of you having
to code a strategy, you can now drag and
drop it and you can build well 10 times
faster than a developer. So that is step
two and then step three is able to back
test very quickly. Like I said, uh if
you didn't test your strategy, how do
you know it works, right? So it's very
important to test the strategy because
if it worked in the past it's likely to
work in the future at least more likely
than if you didn't test something or you
test something and it is really a bad
system then you know it probably won't
work in the future right so step three
is super important and then four is
trades without any errors. How do you do
that? Well, automation solves more or
less all the problems uh for manual
traders. And that's just because yeah,
the trade is executed. It's followed by
the plan. There are no emotions
involved. Yeah. The charts when they
move, a trade is taken, right? Uh
instead of you having to be stuck to
your charts and then has large capital
opportunities. This is like that step
five that is so important to talk about
and that is the topic of today's
webinar. So before I continue, any
questions guys? All right. So, capital,
how to get it and how to keep it. My
journey was uh a lot different because
it started 10 years ago. So, there
weren't prop firms or I didn't no prop
firms existed. I don't think there were
prop firms 10 years ago. But, so my
journey was very uh different compared
to what traders have right now. But we
also walk the prop firm journey as well.
And that is what we're going to talk
about. So, method one is using prop
firms online. today's topic and in
future webinars maybe I do a a session
about how I did it how I got private
capital and started to go uh walk that
path more or less the old way of doing
things. All right so method one using
prop firms online is how to get capital
real quick for people that don't know
what a prop firm is a company that
provides capital and resources to
skilled traders so they can trade on its
behalf in financial markets. So a
company invests in you, you trade that
company for a profit split. They win,
you win, right? That is at least what
you think. The skill uh the skill test
uh companies give you to to you to prove
that you actually can trade, right? The
prop firm tests the trader skill by
giving a trading challenge. Normally you
get a trading account. You need to make
10% uh following a lot of rules. And if
you make that 10%, you pass the
challenge. And then you have a second
challenge and that's the verification
where you need to make another 5% or
more or less that is the the system most
firms offer uh like FTMO like that is
one of the biggest one in the world has
this skill test. Then what's the
business model from their uh their point
of view? Well the trader pays the prop
firm for that skill test. So to take
that skill you need to to pay them a few
hundred bucks. And if the trader wins
and he proves that he can trade, he
passes the 10% and the 5% he gets
capital and they refund the money he
paid for the skill test. Right? So
that's the business model, how it works
from a prop firm point of view. The
statistics, how does this work in real
life? Well, most traders fill the test
and a prop firm makes a lot of money
because they keep the money that people
pay for uh for the skill test, right?
The money is used to pay out the select
few of traders that actually do pass the
skill test and make money. So you have a
lot of people losing and uh selection
making money. We are one of those people
and in this call probably many of you
guys have been working with prop firms
and got payouts. But that is the
business model. You have a lot of losing
traders and they pay the winning traders
because you're not actually trading real
capital. You're trading in demo account.
So if you make 10k profits, that money
didn't really exist, but they still pay
you your profit split. Yeah. All right.
So FTMO is the biggest one to prove how
much money this industry is making with
prop firms is insane. I put in uh from
last year August there is the turnover
of FTMO. They made 213 million um which
is ridiculous. So this is really an
industry on its own. But we're going to
talk about how to beat them, right? How
to how to still be at a good side in
this overall plan. So, what I've learned
in the building thousands of strategies
uh over the past years is you have
strategies to pass the skill test. So,
the 10% and 5% for instance, you have
specifically created strategies to
achieve that. And you also have
strategies to get payouts, right? So you
have two types of strategies to pursue
this and you mostly need two strategies.
Sometimes you can use the same strategy
but I'm not going to share that with you
because I want to give you the highest
probability to to make money with this.
Right. Today we talk about payout
strategies. Maybe in a future webinar
we're going to talk about uh passing
prop firms but right now we're going to
talk about how to get the payouts
consistently. This will blow your mind
to be honest. So take your notes. The
most consistently profitable algorithms
you see online are the riskiest.
Almost everything you see regarding bots
and algorithms online are the most risky
systems with the best track records and
the most consistent results. And I'm
going to show you how that works, why
that is uh the reason because if you
don't know that, you can fall in a trap.
And also if you know this, you can use
it for prop terms. So, these systems
have a very large stop-loss and a very
small target. All right? Creating a very
high win rate because it's so easy to
hit your target versus your stop-loss.
Imagine that you have a huge stop-loss
and you have a very tiny target. The
market just statistically is more likely
to quickly tap your uh target than move
all the way down to your stop- loss.
Right? That's what I'm trying to say
here. and therefore you have very high
win rate but your risk-to-reward is
negative for the more advanced traders
creating profitable results. This
strategy creating profitable results
month in month out until the market does
something crazy and blows up the
account. This is probably uh the
algorithm that you have seen everywhere
online. uh if you ever Googled FX
algorithms or whatever algorithm yeah
you have seen very steep equity charts
and I will show you examples I've seen
these systems come and go for the past
10 years so I'm not just telling you
I've seen this and it's sort of an
obsession for me to see if people trade
it on capital to see okay how long will
they survive right so have here you
create uh you have one that we created
this is uh one of those strategies we
built um together with my team. You can
see it is super consistent, right? Every
month of the 14 months is profit. The
cumulative return is ridiculous. It is
just a straight line, right? All right.
So, it looks great indeed. I promise
this account will blow up one day.
Account gone, everything gone. It will
be a minus 100% uh month. And why do I
say that to you? Well, this is a risky
system to run on private capital. Um but
they always do they always explode. This
one is now running for 14 months and one
day maybe another 14 months will be very
good and then it will be bad. Yeah, I
will show you um why in a second. So
here you have another system. This is
not my system. This is a public system.
This track record I've been following
for many years. It's currently up
11,710%
in profits. Yeah. but it blew up but the
owner deposited double the money to save
it. So you had a big draw down and then
it was margin call and the owner had the
money to double the account and saved it
and that's what you can see here uh in
the big spike right. So also this system
blew up but yeah if it's a small account
you can just double your money but if
you do this on a on a million you better
have a million in cash also laying there
otherwise the million is gone right so
this is how those strategies look and
why do I talk about this why do I share
this with you guys because yeah it's a
little bit of a yeah a weird thing to
share right to talk about systems that
blow up well what if you can trade these
strategies and not worry about blow
blowing up. So you can be very
consistent month in month out making
half a percent 1% maybe more and not
worrying about blowing up. Well, this is
where prop firms come in because it's
not your own capital. It's not even real
capital. So if it blows up after x
amount of months, you did collect the
real money payouts, right? So I will
bring this home for people that see this
for the first time. I think whoa, what
what is this? I'll slowly step by step
show it to you. So if we go back to to
our track record here, you count 14
profitable months equaling 14 payouts
from prop firms, right? When we blow up,
I already made good returns. So one of
our founders of Profus is also here in
the chat and he proved this for almost a
year now that since December running
this system on FTMO on prop firms and
getting payouts, right? And this is what
I'm about to teach you today. And also
give you a strategy that does this. And
then you can test it for yourself. Of
course, um you need to test it yourself
and play around with it. So of course
your own decision, but I just want to
show you how to build these type of
strategies on proactives AI because a
long time ago I made the promise you can
automate anything. So also these type of
systems. So how the industry names these
crazy stupid and risky strategies is
normally either martingale grid systems
or sculping systems. Yeah, you have you
can really investigate a lot of systems
you see online and they probably look
like this or that and then they have a
big draw down uh floating but they close
in profits and they do generate uh
consistent returns but one day they blow
up but on prop firms it doesn't really
matter right because you have more
payouts than uh than the probability of
losing the account. So far questions.
Let me quickly check how that um again
never use these on real capital not
worth the risk to reward. So for some of
you guys you might build uh take the
strategy we share today and you uh
change it a little bit be creative learn
from it and do all of that and then
you're thinking like oh maybe I do run
it on private capital. Of course, it's
your money. Do what with it, whatever.
But my disclaimer is pretty clear,
right? These strategies are risky but
consistent. And
um what you will figure out is like if
you make a 100% gain because your draw
down is 100%. Right? If you know that
you might lose your account, you need to
have crazy good returns every month to
cover that 100%. So therefore, it's not
worth the risk to reward. You can
calculate it yourself, but it is for
prop firms ideal. To follow prop firm
rules, it is important that you adjust
the strategy. The entries, the exits,
everything needs to be adjusted because
we are not allowed to all trade the same
strategies. Um, so when you start with a
strategy like this, when you do trust
that you tested it yourself, it's
important to adjust it and therefore you
need to learn a little bit about how to
use perfect AI. So let's dive into that.
Let's build a strategy like this step by
step and then I share with you the a
link the link will be shared here in the
Google uh meets later on and then yeah
you can just click on it and if you
don't have an account sign up and then
download it and play around with it
adjust it export it and run it. All
right. So this is the equity chart uh on
a CAD on the 15minut time frame. So 15
and this is what the strategy I'm about
to share with you. It's very consistent.
It is not the same strategy as this.
This is a different strategy but ID is
the same and it's also uh well you can
test for yourself right. All right
trading plan for buys. Let's dive into
the trading plan because first we need
to know what is this doing step by step
and then how to transform the trading
plan in building blocks in perfect AI.
So we have three u rules here for buy.
So what do I need to see the market
doing to buy and of course also for
sales. What does the market need to show
me before I click sell? Of course we are
not manually clicking buy and sell. The
algorithm will do that. Um, we're living
in uh 2025, right? Every 15 minutes,
check candle closed is below the
bowlinger band low. I will show you a
chart example soon. Then check if we
don't have trades open, then buy with a
lot size, an x amount of lots. If we do
have trades open, check how far away we
are from this trade and use a different
lot size. So it's possible that you take
a buy, price goes against you and then
you take another buy. So you have two
positions open, sometimes you have three
positions open, sometimes you have four
positions open. Yeah, I'll show you with
examples. Then the trading plan for
sells is the same but then check uh
every 15 minutes check candle closed is
above the bowlinger bands high. Super
simple strategy. This works on so many
strate uh so many different uh simple
rules. We have check if we don't have
trades open then sell with this lot size
and then if we do have trades open check
how far away we are from this trade and
use a different lot size. Pretty easy
trading plan right? All right. How does
that look? Well, here we have the
algorithm uh opened. When you open a
profactive AI algorithm, you can see you
can recognize the colors that this
created on our platform and you see the
bowlinger band, right? So you see uh
more or less a moving channel with three
lines. You have the lower line, the
midline and the high uh higher line, the
top line. Well, the rule for a cell if
we go back is check candle closed above
the band high. Well, we see that right
now. Right now the trade is taken. We
have a sell and we have a huge target uh
huge stop loss and a very tiny target as
I I explained. What happens when p price
moves higher? Well, then I want another
sell because one day it will do that. So
I forwarded it and now you have a sell
trade one that's to the left. You have
sell trade two to the right. So you were
in a sale, price moved against you, you
took another sell, and then the the
floating profit of both of the systems
was positive, and then you close all
cell trades. But we're going to dive
into that a little bit more now, but
this is how the strategy works. You can
also see in the middle, I don't know if
you can clearly see, but in the middle
there was also a buy trade taken. Uh buy
trade taken, and it was a quick win. But
let's focus on these sell trades now.
And well let's buy the uh also do the
buy side. So every 15 minutes check
candle closed below the bowlinger band
low is now transformed to five blocks in
profactus AI. We have block number one
run pair candle. We have block number
two run in session. We have then a
trading rule. We have count trades and
we have a buy now. These are five blocks
you need right now and we're going to
build more and more and more. So run per
candle. What does that mean? Well, every
candlestick close, I want to look at the
charts and see if we have a break of
that bowlinger band high, right? Or the
low. All right. So, the algorithm always
starts with run per candle. Then run in
session a block is used when to trade.
Well, normally you trade almost all the
hours because FX is almost 24 hours a
day open. So, you want to trade let's
say 22 hours um per day. That is what
you do here. So every candlestick close
on a 15minut time frame run in session
and then the trade rule. Well, can you
guess it? What is the trade rule? Check
if the candle close uh that just closed
is below the bowlinger band. All right,
then
check if we don't have trades open then
buy with this lot size. What you can see
here is count trades. Well, the name
already tells you we are counting if we
have any trades open. Well, right now we
don't have trades open. So that is also
valid. And then we have buy now and the
trade is executed. You have that that
happened here. But then this is a sell
example. Um and then this is done. Okay.
Now that is just one trade. We have now
another tree. And this is a lot of copy
paste work. It's just copy paste copy
paste. So it's not really getting more
complex the more blocks we use. But we
have a lot of trades we need to take. So
if we have one trade open, if we are far
away from that trade one, I want to take
trade two if the candle closes again
below the bowling band. So that is what
we did see here with this example. U
again for sales, we had a close above uh
that level and then I'm looking to get a
sell to uh trade two. Right? So you can
see here we have a second tree again run
per candle on the 15-minut time frame
running in that same session but now we
count if we have a buy one trade open.
You can just do that select that in the
that block itself and then select uh
that buy one trade. So select the trade
that was already open. Then check how
much profits it is running. Is it
running 15 pips in profit or is it
running uh in a in a loss? How far away
is it current price and that all trade
because you don't want to enter more
trades on the same level, right? You
want to see markets far away from that
first trade and then trade rule. Well,
trade rule is close on the below the
bowlinger band and then you buy for the
second time. All right, so here you have
two trees. You have buy trade one and
you have buy trade two. All right, let's
continue. But the markets can keep going
against us. So we want more trades. This
is how these systems work, right? It is
again uh just for prop firms. Never run
this on private capital. Um but we have
here a trade number one, then price
falls more. We have trade number two,
then price falls more. You have trade
number three, price falls more, and then
you have your fourth trade. And that one
plays out. And the more trades you have,
the lot size of each position also
changes. So the last trade that banks
banks more than the other ones and
therefore combined you can close all
four positions for profit because the
last trade is the biggest one. That's
how normally Martin Gills work or great
systems. Again be careful with them. We
repeat the same process again just copy
paste and change some settings. So we're
going to just uh we have now two trades
and we need let's say eight trades. So
it's quite a big uh piece of code. You
don't have to build it because we're
going to share this very soon. But uh I
want you to analyze it, practice it,
learn from it, be be active, right? Then
you can build hundreds or thousands of
these systems yourself. So now we have
the the whole piece of code. Um it's the
same. You can see by trade two that tree
looks exactly the same as the tree next
to it and the by trade four, five, six,
seven, eight. So this is the whole
build. uh within the blocks we have
small changes and you can see that if
you analyze the blocks when you have the
code but uh the difference between let's
say buy trade two that tree of blocks
and buy trade three that tree of blocks
we uh just have to count trades you just
count if you already have a position
open uh on uh by trade one or two or you
don't have uh positions open uh of the
other trades because that's the only
complex thing here. All right.
Then we have management. How to manage
this uh algorithm? Well, we have this
stream. Select all trades. Check how
much profit we have floating. So all the
trades combined that we have open. Are
we floating combined in profits or loss?
If floating profit is enough, something
you can of course adjust yourself. If we
are in good floating profit, then we
want to uh close all the trades and we
take our profit and we wait for the next
setups. And yeah, this is how you build
it. You do it. Select all the trades, a
formula to calculate all the the
floating profit. So let's say you have
five trades open, then you have a a
quick formula block there where you
count all the the trades combined. And
then trade rule. Um so is the profit
higher than what I want? Yes. Okay. Then
once per trade, close all the trades.
And this is how it works. The complexity
of this system is in using group
numbers. I'm going to explain that real
quick. Remember you have that buy trade
one. You have the buy trade two. Perhaps
you have three, four, five, six, seven,
eight. You have a lot of trades, right?
What you can do is tag them. So give
them a name. Buy trade one has the name
group one. By trade two has the name
group two. And then you can separate
your trades. And that's done within the
platform within the blocks. But that's
just the only complex thing of this
algorithm for if you're totally new to
building this, you quickly have to get
used to it. We have a lot of templates
and we have a big docks also where you
can just take a lot of tutorials to
learn. But this the complex thingy uh
for this strategy. All right. Uh please
open the strategy and learn how it
works. The link will now be shared by
Yoast in this chat. So, Yos, can you
share the template link and then you can
download it. Of course, this is only
available for you guys here online. So,
thank you for hopping in and let's cover
some questions. Yeah, let's cover some
questions. Ask me in the chat here. Let
me know. Did you guys like this? Was
this beneficial? Was this too advanced?
Was this too easy?
All right. Yos, thank you for sharing.
Really good. Thanks. Perfect. What's the
average max draw down of this strategy?
All right. Yeah. So, uh if you uh
download the strategy, you have inputs
and inputs are the settings of your
strategy. And there you can adjust the
lot size. So, play around with that. Run
a back test. See what the floating draw
down is. And then if it's too much for
you, then just in decrease the size,
right? If it's too small, then increase
the size. Just play around with it. If
you want to have a max risk uh max draw
down of 5%. Then you need to decrease
the lot size a bit. But if you have for
instance uh 10% room then you can maybe
trade a little bit more risk. For me,
what we personally do with our accounts
is to just target half a percent, 1% a
month on prop ter firms and then let's
say you are 400k funded, you just
passively make 4k. But you can also up
the risk, but then the probability of
losing the account and having big draw
down once in the 12 months or in the 24
months or 36 months or whatever. Um it
yeah, it all depends on do you want big
payouts fast or consistent and long
term. That's uh always the the thing,
right? All right. Uh this is great.
Thank you. Very good topic. Crazy
strategy. What's the formula for
defining target on each new trade? All
right. So, uh good one. I didn't cover
that. The first trade I believe has a a
small target. And every second trade, uh
so if you have one position open and a
new one, a new one, a new one, they
don't have um targets. And that's
because you sum all the floating profit
together. So you don't need to target,
you just want to stack your positions
and when you move into profits uh
combined if your profit is uh there like
maybe you're floating uh 500 bucks uh
maybe that's what you have in the
algorithm then everything is closed so
you don't need the target. It's just
managed every every tick. I hope that
answers it.
>> Um nice that you explained the strategy
in detail before sharing. Yeah. Yeah. We
can also build it like really build it
in the platform step by step. But I
think that will be maybe too overkill
but especially with a big project like
this but maybe u in the future we can
also just not do a keynote and just
build that I just built a strategy live
with you. You can ask questions and be
very uh very nice there. Uh great for
further development. Combining it with
simple breakout strats from for me makes
understanding somewhat more complex
strategies easier. Nice.
Will there be tutorials on loops and
perfect? Maybe in later Thursday
meetings for example. We can do advanced
uh concepts. I try to get these um try
to cover both right to do uh for
beginners and advanced traders. uh but
we can do uh an advanced topic maybe uh
later this year for the the more active
builders that have a little bit more
experience and loops. Yeah, loops are
easy to build in perfect uh you you just
uh you don't uh need too many blocks. So
I will definitely teach you guys that.
Uh what about stacking positive
positions? MT Martingale
maybe that's it, right? Go test it. go
try build it and play around with it. Uh
it's an interesting uh idea indeed.
Uh we run this on all the mean reversion
pairs. So think about a cat for
instance. Aussie cat really never move
somewhere. Uh just like a kiwi kiwi cat
those pairs are the best. And then run
this system again on the 15minut time
frame and just test for yourself. All
right. Thanks for explaining same
questions on lot size. Uh you can see
that in the settings when you download
the system uh you have eight different
lot sizes and they stack so you can
adjust that see what better results you
have but we gave you default settings
that already work on rcat for instance
but you can play around with it make
drone
general question I see new cap isn't
taking anyone any more members is the
course to remain for
uh it's we yeah so new cap is a
different company than profactus but Um
we will launch a uh a big course on uh
uh on proactus as well but
that is not a main priority now we are
building the best platform out there
that cannot be all places at once right
so if you want to learn YouTube has a
lot of tutorials a lot of people know
how to build they want to to share that
create content if you're an advanced
builder right go to YouTube make an
account and start sharing uh good
content that's uh we also have Enso here
he's I Dubai in his background he uh
good life he uh is Dutch he has a Dutch
community teaching about profactus so
more people will uh teach you about
building we are just here to to make
sure the platform is suitable for
everyone and works
uh let's see a lot of questions guys
uh are your best systems the ones with
the most blocks or not necessarily no
keep it keep it so simple this is what
every also the people that learned
building And if I interview them quite
quite often like what what have you
built? And we of course also built
thousands of strategies, simple wins,
simple wins. Focus on simple strategies
like the amount of blocks I shared today
or Yos shared with you today is is just
a lot of blocks because you have
multiple trades but it has one trade
rule, right? Keep it simple.
Three trading rules max, maybe five, but
don't over complicate it.
Bjorn, uh, with imperfectus, it would be
great if you can get a tutorial on how
to determine the bias for a trade.
Example, only enter when an overall
higher high is made and execute on a
trade when price pulls back to point to
fib. Yeah, I have built these type of
strategies myself. Uh, I can uh post
more of them like these small tutorials
in the docs. So, docs.practice.ai,
that's also in the builder. You have
like a question mark down right. open
that and you find a lot of tutorials but
I will uh feed that more I will build
these tutorials there um simple question
is how we can build a tradable range
when positions are executed
only yeah so it's a little bit too much
work to to share that tutorial right now
um but I'll ASAP make a tutorial on it
it's like for the other people uh
listening what if the market is in a
trending environment can you tell your
algorithm to just trade in that training
environment or markets are consolidating
can you just ask your system to to to
trade in a consolidation market like
those are good filters interesting
filters I'll share that possible to make
a B different uh with different time
frames so for example daily time frame
bias and 4hour entry yeah so any time
frame is possible you can look at the
weekly and the daily the 4 hour the one
hour and then execute on the one minute
if you want um Yeah, all possible.
All right. All right.
Any more questions?
And did you download the system? Because
after this call, it's gone. So, make
sure you got it. Yeah.
But you have the link. So, it will be
fine.
All right, guys. If there are no more
questions, it was already almost a
40inut call. Thank you for being here.
Next month, every second Thursday of
every month, we host a live webinar and
it's always at the same time. So, put it
in your calendar and yeah, happy to keep
sharing good stuff with you guys. Um,
thanks.
>> No, this is not the machine you're
all right. All right, guys. Thank you
and we speak next month. Bye-bye.
[Music]
