                           Example 1.1 (Continued)                                        BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

                longs_sim=longs(P);
                shorts_sim=shorts(P);

                pos_sim=zeros(length(cl), 1);

                for h=0:holddays-1
                         long_sim_lag=backshift(h, longs_sim);
                         long_sim_lag(isnan(long_sim_lag))=false;
                         long_sim_lag=logical(long_sim_lag);

                         short_sim_lag=backshift(h, shorts_sim);
                         short_sim_lag(isnan(short_sim_lag))=false;
                         short_sim_lag=logical(short_sim_lag);

                         pos(long_sim_lag)=pos(long_sim_lag)+1;
                         pos(short_sim_lag)=pos(short_sim_lag)-1;
                end

                ret_sim=backshift(1, pos_sim).*marketRet/holddays;

                                                                                        21

                ret_sim(isnan(ret_sim))=0;

                if (mean(ret_sim)>= mean(ret))
                numSampleAvgretBetterOrEqualObserved=...

                    numSampleAvgretBetterOrEqualObserved+1;
                end

    end

  There is not a single sample out of 100,000 where the average
  strategy return is greater than or equal to the observed return.
  Clearly, the third test is much weaker for this strategy.

   The fact that a null hypothesis is not unique and different null hypoth-
eses can give rise to different estimates of statistical significance is one
reason why many critics believe that hypothesis testing is a flawed meth-
odology (Gill, 1999). The other reason is that we actually want to know
the conditional probability that the null hypothesis is true given that we
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGhave observed the test statistic R: P(H0|R). But the procedure we outlined
        previously actually just computed the conditional probability of obtaining
        a test statistic R given that the null hypothesis is true: P(R|H0). Rarely is
        P(R|H0) = P(H0|R).

           Even though hypothesis testing and the rejection of a null hypothesis
        may not be a very satisfactory way to estimate statistical significance, the
        failure to reject a null hypothesis can inspire very interesting insights. Our
        Example 1.1 shows that any random returns distribution with high kurtosis
        can be favorable to momentum strategies.

        When Not to Backtest a Strategy

        We have spent much effort earlier convincing you that you should backtest
        every strategy that comes your way before trading it. Why would we rec-
        ommend against backtesting some strategies?The fact is that there are some
        published strategies that are so obviously flawed it would be a waste of time
        to even consider them. Given what you know now about common pitfalls of
        backtesting, you are in a good position to judge whether you would want to
        backtest a strategy without even knowing the details.We will look at a few
22 examples here.

           Example 1: A strategy that has a backtest annualized return of 30 per-
               cent and a Sharpe ratio of 0.3, and a maximum drawdown duration of
               two years.

           Very few traders (as opposed to "investors") have the stomach for a strat-
        egy that remains "under water" for two years.The low Sharpe ratio coupled
        with the long drawdown duration indicates that the strategy is not consis-
        tent. The high average return may be just a fluke, and it is not likely to re-
        peat itself when we start to trade the strategy live. Another way to say this
        is that the high return is likely the result of data-snooping bias, and the long
        drawdown duration will make it unlikely that the strategy will pass a cross-
        validation test. Do not bother to backtest high return but low Sharpe ratio
        strategies.Also, do not bother to backtest strategies with a maximum draw-
        down duration longer than what you or your investors can possibly endure.

           Example 2: A long-only crude oil futures strategy returned 20 percent
               in 2007, with a Sharpe ratio of 1.5.

           A quick check of the total return of holding the front-month crude oil fu-
        tures in 2007 reveals that it was 47 percent, with a Sharpe ratio of 1.7. Hence,
        this trading strategy is not in any way superior to a simple buy-and-hold
strategy! Moral of the story:We must always choose the appropriate bench-     BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION
mark to measure a trading strategy against. The appropriate benchmark of
a long-only strategy is the return of a buy-and-hold position--the informa-
tion ratio rather than the Sharpe ratio.

   Example 3: A simple "buy-low-sell-high" strategy picks the 10 lowest-
      priced stocks at the beginning of the year and holds them for a year.
      The backtest return in 2001 is 388 percent.

   The first question that should come to mind upon reading this strategy is:
Was the strategy backtested using a survivorship-bias-free stock database?
In other words, does the stock database include those stocks that have since
been delisted? If the database includes only stocks that have survived until
today, then the strategy will most likely pick those lucky survivors that hap-
pened to be very cheap at the beginning of 2001.With the benefit of hind-
sight, the backtest can, of course, achieve a 388 percent return. In contrast,
if the database includes delisted stocks, then the strategy will most likely
pick those stocks to form the portfolio, resulting in almost 100 percent
loss. This 100 percent loss would be the realized return if we had traded
the strategy back in 2001, and the 388 percent return is an inflated backtest
return that can never be realized. If the author did not specifically mention
that the data used include delisted stocks, then we can assume the backtest 23
suffers from survivorship bias and the return is likely to be inflated.

   Example 4: A neural net trading model that has about 100 nodes gener-
      ates a backtest Sharpe ratio of 6.

   My alarms always go off whenever I hear the term neural net trad-
ing model, not to mention one that has 100 nodes. All you need to
know about the nodes in a neural net is that the number of param-
eters to be fitted with in-sample training data is proportional to the
number of nodes. With at least 100 parameters, we can certainly fit the
model to any time series we want and obtain a fantastic Sharpe ratio.
Needless to say, it will have little or no predictive power going forward
due to data-snooping bias.

   Example 5: A high-frequency E-mini S&P 500 futures trading strategy
      has a backtest annual average return of 200 percent and a Sharpe ratio
      of 6. Its average holding period is 50 seconds.

   Can we really backtest a high-frequency trading strategy? The perfor-
mance of a high-frequency trading strategy depends on the order types
used and the execution method in general. Furthermore, it depends cru-
cially on the market microstructure. Even if we have historical data of the
entire order book, the profit from a high-frequency strategy is still very
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGdependent on the reactions of other market participants. One has to ques-
        tion whether there is a "Heisenberg uncertainty principle" at work: The
        act of placing or executing an order might alter the behavior of the other
        market participants. So be very skeptical of a so-called backtest of a high-
        frequency strategy.

           Life is too short to backtest every single strategy that we read about, so
        we hope awareness of the common pitfalls of backtesting will help you se-
        lect what strategies to backtest.

        Will a Backtest Be Predictive of
           Future Returns?

        Even if we manage to avoid all the common pitfalls outlined earlier and there
        are enough trades to ensure statistical significance of the backtest, the predic-
        tive power of any backtest rests on the central assumption that the statisti-
        cal properties of the price series are unchanging, so that the trading rules
        that were profitable in the past will be profitable in the future.This assump-
        tion is, of course, invalidated often in varying degrees: A country's economic
        prospect changes, a company's management changes, and a financial market's
24 structure changes. In the past decade in the United States, we have witnessed
        numerous instances of the last category of changes. Among them:

         Decimalization of U.S. stock quotes on April 9, 2001. (Prior to this date,
           U.S. stocks were quoted in one-eighth or one-sixteenth of a penny.) This
           caused bid-ask spreads to decrease, but also caused the "displayed liquidity"
           at the best bid and ask prices to decrease (Arnuk and Saluzzi, 2012).This in
           turn caused profitability of many statistical arbitrage strategies to decrease
           while increasing the profitability of many high-frequency strategies.

         The 2008 financial crisis that induced a subsequent 50 percent collapse of
           average daily trading volumes (Durden, 2012). Retail trading and owner-
           ship of common stock is particularly reduced. This has led to decreasing
           average volatility of the markets, but with increasing frequency of sudden
           outbursts such as that which occurred during the flash crash in May 2010 and
           the U.S. federal debt credit rating downgrade in August 2011.The overall
           effect has been a general decrease in profits for mean-reverting strategies,
           which thrive on a high but constant level of volatility.

         The same 2008 financial crisis, which also initiated a multiyear bear
           market in momentum strategies, as discussed in Chapter 6.
 The SEC's Regulation NMS implemented in July 2007, which also               BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION
   contributed to the drastic decrease in the average trade sizes and the ob-
   solescence of the NYSE block trade (Arnuk and Saluzzi, 2012).

 The removal of the old uptick rule for short sales in June 2007 and the
   reinstatement of the new Alternative Uptick Rule in 2010.

   Strategies that performed superbly prior to each of these "regime shifts"
may stop performing and vice versa. Backtests done using data prior to
such regime shifts may be quite worthless, while backtests done using
recent data may be no more indicative of future profits if and when a fu-
ture regime shift is to occur. The general point of this is that algorithmic
trading is not just about algorithms, programming, and mathematics: An
awareness of such fundamental market and economic issues is also needed
to inform us on whether a backtest is predictive and will continue to be
predictive.

 Choosing a Backtesting and Automated
   Execution Platform

Software companies have worked very hard to provide traders with a wide 25
variety of backtesting and automated execution platforms that cater to ev-
ery possible level of programming skills.We are faced with two basic choices
when it comes to deciding on a trading platform:

1. Buying a special-purpose backtesting and execution platform, and
    implementing your strategy using that platform's special-purpose
    graphical user interface (GUI) or programming language.

 2. Writing your own backtest and execution program in a generic
    programming language such as C++, either in a completely stand-
    alone manner with piecemeal purchases of software libraries to make
    the task easier or within an integrated development environment
    (IDE) that comes with a comprehensive library catering to algorith-
    mic trading.

We consider some criteria for making this choice next.

How Good Is Your Programming Skill?

If you have little skill in programming, then the only choice is to pick a
special-purpose trading platform.These platforms unburden the user from
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGhaving to learn a programming language by presenting a graphical "drag-
        and-drop" user interface for building a trading strategy. Examples of these
         BOX 1.1products are Deltix and Progress Apama. However, I have found that these
        GUIs can be quite limiting in the variety of strategies that you can build,
        and in the long run, it is far more efficient to become adept in a program-
        ming language in order to express your strategy. (Note that Deltix and
        Progress Apama also allow other ways to specify a strategy, as explained
        below.)

           Traders possessing the next level of programming skill should consider
        implementing both backtesting and automated execution using one of the
        scripting languages. These languages do not require compilation, and you
        can instantly see the results the moment you finish typing in the mathe-
        matical or logical expressions. Many traders' favorite backtesting platform,
        Microsoft Excel, perhaps used in conjunction withVisual Basic (VB) macros,
        belongs to this category. But it is actually quite hard to build a reasonably
        complicated strategy in Excel, and even harder to debug it. Excel also is not
        a particularly high-performance language, so if your strategy is very compu-
        tationally intensive, it is not going to work. If you use Excel for automated
        executions, you may find that you have to use DDE links provided by your
26 brokerage for market data updates, and you will likely need to add Visual
        Basic macros to handle more complicated trading logic, which is quite in-
        efficient. (However, see Box 1.1 for an Excel-like trading platform that is
        supercharged for efficiency.)

                     Excel on Steroids--The FXone Automated Execution Platform

                     There is a currency trading platform called FXone that looks like Excel, but the
                     underlying computational engine is written in a high-performance language
                     like C++ instead of relying on VB macros. It is a true tick-driven application:
                     Every tick (in the FX case, a tick is a new quote) triggers a recalculation of
                     all the values in all of the cells of the spreadsheet. Furthermore, it has an
                     internal cache for real-time data so that different cells that require the same
                     data to compute can simply retrieve it from the cache, instead of duplicating
                     subscriptions of the same data. It is also a true multithreaded platform at two
                     different levels. First, different strategies written on different Excel workbooks
                     can get market data updates and submit orders simultaneously. Second,
                     different cells within the same workbook can also get updates and act on
                     new data simultaneously. That is to say, even if the calculation in one cell
                     happens to take very long to complete, it will not prevent other cells from
                     responding to a new tick by, say, submitting an order. A screenshot of FXone
                     is shown in Figure 1.1.
                                                                                                      BOX 1.1 (Continued )

FIGURE 1.1 Screenshot of FXone.

BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION  27
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGMany special-purpose trading platforms, including QuantHouse and
        RTD Tango and the aforementioned Deltix and Progress Apama, also in-
        clude ways for coding a strategy with their own proprietary programming
        languages, which are usually quite simple and easy to learn, maybe as easy
        as Visual Basic. Aside from the institutional platforms mentioned here,
        many retail traders are familiar with MetaTrader, NinjaTrader, Trading
        Blox, or TradeStation Easy Language. I have not tried all of these platforms
        personally, but I have a lingering suspicion that despite the apparent ease of
        use and other advantages I mention later, they all in some way place some
        limitations on the type of strategies that can be backtested and executed.

           Requiring just slightly more skills than programming in VB, traders will
        find the scripting languages of MATLAB, R, and Python offer vastly more
        ease of debugging, much greater flexibility in the type of strategies that can
        be backtested, and higher efficiency in backtesting large data sets.These are
        what we call "REPL" languages. REPL is programmer-speak for "Read-Eval-
        Print-Loop." That is, you can type in a mathematical expression, and the
        program will immediately evaluate it and print out the answer, and get ready
        for you to input the next expression. It works exactly like a handheld cal-
        culator, but better:You can also save all these expressions in a file, and have
28 the program automatically execute them sequentially. The syntax of these
        languages is designed to be more intuitive and easier to understand than
        conventional programming languages such as C++ and much more flexible
        in terms of the type of variables that can be used in a program. Scalars, ar-
        rays, and strings are all basically dealt with using a similar syntax and passed
        along to functions in the same way.

           MATLAB can also utilize Java, C++, or C# libraries or application pro-
        gramming interfaces (APIs) and call functions implemented in those librar-
        ies or APIs. This allows MATLAB to take advantage of the more efficient
        implementations in those conventional languages when a task is particularly
        computationally intensive. Also, there are far more libraries and APIs that
        are written in those conventional languages than those written in MATLAB,
        R, or Python, so this feature is often essential.

           Many algorithmic traders are aware that MATLAB, R, and Python are
        excellent languages for backtesting. But less well known is the fact that
        they can be turned into execution platforms as well with the addition
        of some toolboxes. Most brokerages have APIs written in Java, C++, or
        C#; and, as I said earlier, MATLAB can call functions in APIs written in
        such languages, though it does take some familiarity with these languages
to know how to call these functions. If you would prefer a solution that  BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION
obviates making "foreign-language" API calls in MATLAB, there are a
number of commercial products available. MATLAB's own DatafeedTool-
box can send orders to Trading Technologies' X_TRADER. To connect
MATLAB to Interactive Brokers, undocumentedmatlab.com has devel-
oped an API called IB-Matlab. Another vendor, www.exchangeapi.com,
has a similar API called quant2ib, as well as one called quant2tt for con-
necting MATLAB to Trading Technologies. For other brokerages, www.
pracplay.com offers a bridge from MATLAB or R to 15 or more brokers
for a monthly fee. A free, open-source MATLAB API for connecting to
Interactive Brokers was developed by Jev Kuznetsov and is available for
download from MATLAB Central's File Exchange. Meanwhile, the MAT-
FIX software from agoratron.com lets your MATLAB program send or-
ders using the Financial Information eXchange (FIX) protocol to brokers
or exchanges. You can also use MATLAB to call the Java or .NET func-
tions in QuickFIX, an open source FIX engine (Kozola, 2012). For Py-
thon users, the free, open-source software IbPy will connect your Python
trading program to Interactive Brokers.While these add-ons to MATLAB
and Python make it possible to connect to a broker, they nevertheless do
not shield you from all the complexity of such connections. And, more 29
important, it is cumbersome to use the same program for both backtest-
ing and execution.

   If you are a hard-core programmer, you will, of course, have no prob-
lem backtesting and automating execution directly in the most flexible,
most efficient, and most robust of programming languages, such as afore-
mentioned trio of Java, C++, or C#. As I said earlier, all brokerages or
exchanges that cater to algorithmic traders provide APIs in one or more
of these languages, or they allow you to submit orders using the FIX
messages, which in turn can be created and transmitted using a program
written in one of these languages. (For example, QuickFIX, mentioned
previously, is available in C++, C#, VB, Python, and Ruby.) But even
here the software industry has come to make our strategy implementation
easier and more robust by providing IDEs designed just for backtesting.
In fact, many of the special-purpose trading platforms (Deltix, Progress
Apama, QuantHouse, RTD Tango, etc.) include ways for coding strategies
using general-purpose, advanced programming languages that make them
resemble IDEs. There are also free, open-source class libraries or IDEs
that I describe in the next section.
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGCan Backtesting and Execution Use
      the Same Program?

        Special-purpose execution platforms typically hide the complexity of con-
        necting to a brokerage or exchange, receiving live market data, sending or-
        ders and receiving order confirmations, updating portfolio positions etc.
        from the programmer. Meanwhile, special-purpose backtesting platforms
        typically come integrated with historical data. So for many special-purpose
        trading platforms, the backtest program can be made the same as the live
        execution program by factoring out the pure trading logic into a function,
        unencumbered with details of how to retrieve data or where to submit or-
        ders, and switching between backtesting mode and live execution mode can
        be done by pushing a button to switch between feeding in historical data
        versus live market data.

           This ease of switching between backtesting and live execution is more
        than just convenience: It eliminates any possibility of discrepancies or er-
        rors in transcribing a backtest strategy into a live strategy, discrepancies that
        often plague strategies written in a general programming language whether
        it is C++ or MATLAB. Just as importantly, it eliminates the possibility of
        look-ahead bias. As explained before, look-ahead bias means mistakenly in-
30 corporating future, unknowable information as part of the historical data
        input to the backtest engine. Special-purpose platforms feed in historical
        market data into the trade generating engine one tick or one bar at a time,
        just as it would feeding in live market data. So there is no possibility that
        future information can be used as input.This is one major advantage of using
        a special-purpose trading platform.

           There is one more advantage in using a platform where the backtesting
        and live execution programs are one and the same--it enables true tick-
        based high-frequency trading strategies backtesting.This is because most in-
        dustrial-strength live execution programs are "event-driven"; that is, a trade
        is triggered by the arrival of a new tick, not the end of an arbitrary time
        bar. So if the input historical data is also tick-based, we can also backtest a
        high-frequency strategy that depends on the change of every tick or even
        every change in the order book. (I said "in theory" assuming that your hard-
        ware is powerful enough. Otherwise, see the discussion later in this chapter
        in the section "What Type of Asset Classes or Strategies Does the Platform
        Support?") Of course, we can backtest tick-based strategies in MATLAB by
        feeding every tick into the program as well, though that is quite a cumber-
        some procedure.
TABLE 1.2 Comparisons of Open-Source Integrated Development Environments
                 (IDEs) for Backtesting and Automated Execution

                        Asset                         Tick CEP
                                                      based? enabled?
IDE        Language(s)  class(es) Broker(s)

ActiveQuant Java, MATLAB, R Various CTS, FIX,Trading Yes   No

                                   Technologies-

                                   supported brokers

Algo-Trader Java        Various Interactive Brokers, Yes   Yes

                                   FIX

Marketcetera Java, Python, Ruby Various Various, FIX  Yes  Yes

OpenQuant .NET (C#,VB) Various Various, FIX           ?    No

TradeLink  .NET (C#, C++, Various  Various, FIX       Yes  No
              VB), Java, Pascal,
              Python

   If you are a competent programmer who prefers the flexibility of a generalBACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION
purpose programming language, yet you want to use the same program for
both backtesting and live trading because of the preceding considerations,
you can still use the institutional-grade special-purpose platforms as IDEs,
or you can use the many open-source IDEs available: Marketcetera, Trade-
Link, Algo-Trader, ActiveQuant. I call them IDEs, but they are more than 31
just a trading strategy development environment:They come with libraries
that deal with the nuts and bolts of connecting to and exchanging data with
your broker, much like a special-purpose platform does. Many of them are
also integrated with historical data, which is an important time saver. As
an added bonus, these open-source IDEs are either free or quite low-cost
compared to special-purpose platforms. I display inTable 1.2 the languages,
markets, and brokers that they support. (FIX as a broker means that the
system can directly access any execution venues via the FIX protocol, re-
gardless of clearing broker.) I also indicate whether the IDE is tick based
(sometimes called event driven or stream based ).

   One should note that Table 1.2 only compares features of open-source
IDEs.The institutional-grade special-purpose platforms typically have all of
these features.

What Type of Asset Classes or Strategies Does the
Platform Support?

While using a special-purpose platform for trading strategies has several
important advantages described earlier, few but the most high end of these
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGplatforms support all possible asset classes, including stocks, futures, cur-
        rencies, and options. For example, the popular MetaTrader is for currencies
        trading only. It is especially difficult for these platforms to trade strate-
        gies that involve arbitrage between different asset classes, such as between
        futures and stocks or currencies and futures.The open-source IDEs are bet-
        ter able to handle these situations. As Table 1.2 indicates, most IDEs can
        trade a variety of asset classes. But, as usual, the most flexible solution in this
        respect is a stand-alone program written outside of any IDE.

           Beyond asset classes, many special-purpose platforms also place restric-
        tions on the type of strategies that they support even within one asset class.
        Often, simple pairs trading strategies require special modules to handle. Most
        lower-end platforms cannot handle common statistical arbitrage or portfolio
        trading strategies that involve many symbols. Open-source IDEs do not have
        such restrictions, and, of course, neither do stand-alone programs.

           What about high(er)-frequency trading?What kind of platforms can sup-
        port this demanding trading strategy? The surprising answer is that most
        platforms can handle the execution part of high-frequency trading without
        too much latency (as long as your strategy can tolerate latencies in the 1- to
        10-millisecond range), and since special-purpose platforms as well as IDEs
32 typically use the same program for both backtesting and execution, back-
        testing shouldn't in theory be a problem either.

           To understand why most platforms have no trouble handling high-
        frequency executions, we have to realize that most of the latency that needs
        to be overcome in high-frequency trading is due to live market data latency,
        or brokerage order confirmation latency.

         1. Live market data latency:
             For your program to receive a new quote or trade price within 1 to
             10 milliseconds (ms), you have to colocate your program at the ex-
             change or in your broker's data center (see Box 1.2); furthermore,
             you have to receive a direct data feed from the exchanges involved, not
             from a consolidated data feed such as SIAC's Consolidated Tape System
             (CTS). (For example, Interactive Brokers' data feed only offers snap-
             shots of market data every 250 ms.)

          2. Brokerage order confirmation latency:
             If a strategy submits limit orders, it will depend on a timely order sta-
             tus confirmation before it can decide what to do next. For some retail
             brokerages, it can take up to six seconds between the execution of an
             order and your program receiving the execution confirmation, virtually
BOX 1.2  Colocation of Trading Programs

         The general term colocation can mean several ways of physically locating

         your trading program outside of your desktop computer. Stretching the

         definition a bit, it can mean installing your trading program in a cloud server or

         VPS (virtual private server) such as Amazon's EC2, slicehost.com, or gogrid.

         com. The advantage of doing so is to prevent power or Internet outages

         that are more likely to strike a private home or office than a commercial data

         center, with its backup power supply and redundant network connectivity.

         Colocating in a cloud server does not necessarily shorten the time data take

         to travel between your brokerage or an exchange to your trading program,

         since many homes or offices are now equipped with a fiber optics connection

         to their Internet service provider (e.g., Verizon's FiOS in the United States, and

         Bell's Fibe Internet in Canada). To verify whether colocating in a virtual private

         server (VPS) actually reduces this latency, you would need to conduct a test

         yourself by "pinging" your broker's server to see what the average round

         trip time is. Certainly, if your VPS happens to be located physically close to

         your broker or exchange, and if they are directly connected to an Internet

         backbone, this latency will be smaller. (For example, pinging the Interactive

         Brokers' quote server from my home desktop computer produces an average

         round trip time of about 55 ms, pinging the same server from Amazon's EC2

         takes about 25 ms, and pinging it from various VPSs located near Interactive

         Brokers takes about 16 to 34 ms.)                                                                             33

         I mention VPS only because many trading programs are not so compu-

         tationally intensive as to require their own dedicated servers. But if they are,                              BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

         you can certainly upgrade to such services at many of the hosting companies

         familiar with the requirements of the financial trading industry such as Equinix

         and Telx, both of whom operate data centers in close proximity to the various

         exchanges.

         If your server is already in a secure location (whether that is your office

         or a data center) and is immune to power outage, then all you need is a

         fast connection to your broker or the exchange. You can consider using

         an "extranet," which is like the Internet but operated by a private company,

         which will guarantee a minimum communication speed. BT Radianz, Savvis,

         and TNS are examples of such companies. If you have a large budget, you

         can also ask these companies to build a dedicated communication line from

         your server to your broker or exchange as well.

         The next step up in the colocation hierarchy is colocating inside your

         brokerage's data center, so that quotes or orders confirmation generated

         by your broker are transmitted to your program via an internal network,

         unmolested by the noise and vagaries of the public Internet. Various brokers

         that cater to professional traders have made available colocation service:

         examples are Lime Brokerage and FXCM. (Because of colocation, clients

         of Lime Brokerage can even receive direct data feeds from the NYSE at a
                                                                                                         (Continued )
                     BOX 1.2 (Continued )  relatively low rate, which, as I mentioned before, is faster than the consolidated

                                           SIAC CTS data feed.)

                                           The ultimate colocation is, of course, situating your trading server at the

                                           exchange or ECN itself. This is likely to be an expensive proposition (except

                                           for forex ECNs), and useful only if you have a prime broker relationship, which

                                           allows you to have "sponsored access" to connect to the exchange without

                                           going through the broker's infrastructure (Johnson, 2010). Such prime broker

                                           relationships can typically be established only if you can generate institutional-

                                           level commissions or have multimillion-dollar account. The requirements as

                                           well as expenses to establish colocation are lower for forex prime brokers and

                                           ECNs. Most forex ECNs including Currenex, EBS, FXall, and Hotspot operate

                                           within large commercial data centers such as Equinix's NY4 facility, and it is

                                           not too expensive to colocate at that facility or sign up with a VPS that does.

                                           Some traders have expressed concern that colocating their trading

                                           programs on a remote server exposes them to possible theft of their

                                           intellectual property. The simplest way is eliminate this risk is to just store

                                           "executables" (binary computer codes that look like gibberish to humans)

                                           on these remote servers, and not the source code of your trading algorithm.

                                           (Even with a MATLAB program, you can convert all the .m files to .p files

                                           before loading them to the remote server.) Without source codes, no one

                                           can know the operating instructions of running the trading program, and no

                                           one will be foolish enough to risk capital on trading a black-box strategy of

34                                         which they know little about. For the truly paranoid, you can also require an

ALGORITHMIC TRADING                        ever-changing password that depends on the current time to start a program.

                                           ensuring that no high-frequency trading can be done. Even if your bro-
                                           kerage has order confirmation latency below 10 ms, or if they allow
                                           you to have direct market access to the exchanges so you get your order
                                           status confirmation directly from the exchanges, you would still need
                                           to colocate your program with either your broker in the former case,
                                           or with the exchange in the latter case.

                                              Practically any software program (other than Excel running with a
                                           VB macro) takes less than 10 ms to submit a new order after receiving
                                           the latest market data and order status updates, so software or hardware
                                           latency is usually not the bottleneck for high-frequency trading, unless
                                           you are using one program to monitor thousands of symbols. (Concern-
                                           ing this last point, see Box 1.3 for issues related to multithreading.) But
                                           backtesting a high-frequency strategy is entirely a different matter.To do
                                           this, you will be required to input many months of tick data (trades and
                                           quotes), maybe on many symbols, into the backtesting platform.Worse,
                                           sometimes you have to input level 2 quotes, too. Just the quantity of
BOX 1.3     Multithreading and High-Frequency Trading of Multiple Symbols

            Multithreading for a trading platform means that it can respond to multiple    BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION
            events (usually the arrival of a new tick) simultaneously. This is particularly
            important if the program trades multiple symbols simultaneously, which is
            often the case for a stock-trading program. You certainly don't want your buy
            order for AAPL to be delayed just because the program is deciding whether to
            sell BBRY! If you write your own stand-alone trading program using a modern
            programming language such as Java or Python, you won't have any problem
            with multithreading because this ability is native to such languages. However,
            if you use MATLAB, you will need to purchase the Parallel Computing Toolbox
            as well; otherwise, there is no multithreading. (Even if you purchase that
            Toolbox, you are limited to 12 independent threads, hardly enough to trade
            500 stocks simultaneously!) But do not confuse the lack of multithreading
            in MATLAB with the "loss of ticks." If you write two "listeners," A and B, in
            MATLAB to receive tick data from two separate symbols, because the fact
            that listener A is busy processing a tick-triggered event doesn't mean that
            listener B is "deaf." Once listener A has finished processing, listener B will
            start to process those tick events that it has received while A was busy, with
            no lost ticks (Kuznetsov, 2010).

         data will overwhelm the memory of most machines, if they are not han- 35
         dled in special ways (such as using parallel computing algorithms). Most
         special-purpose backtesting platforms are not designed to be especially
         intelligent when handling this quantity of data, and most of them are not
         equipped at all to backtest data with all of bid/ask/last tick prices (and
         sizes) nor level 2 quotes either. So backtesting a high-frequency strategy
         usually requires that you write your own stand-alone program with spe-
         cial customization. Actually, backtesting a high-frequency strategy may
         not tell you much about its real-life profitability anyway because of the
         Heisenberg uncertainty principle that I mentioned before.

            Besides high-frequency trading, news-driven trading often causes all
         but the top-end special-purpose platforms to stumble. News-driven
         trading by definition requires as input a machine-readable news feed.
         Most special-purpose platforms do not have this capability, and neither
         do most open-source IDEs. Exceptions include Progress Apama, which
         incorporates both Dow Jones and Reuters machine-readable news feed,
         and Deltix, which integrates Ravenpack's News Sentiment data feed.
         Among IDE's, Marketcetera offers a newsfeed from benzinga.com
         (which is unlikely to match the speed of delivery of Bloomberg, Dow
         Jones, and Reuters). If you are writing your own stand-alone trading
                     program, you have the flexibility of connecting to these news feed ei-
                     ther using the news provider's API (e.g., both Dow Jones and Thomson
                     Reuters have made available their machine-readable news through an
                     API) or simply read a news XML file ftp'ed to your hard-drive periodi-
                     cally by the news provider. If you are news trading at high frequency, the
                     former expensive solution is an absolute necessity. Otherwise, there are
                     much more affordable solutions from vendors such as Newsware. I will
                     discuss more on the topic of event-driven trading in Chapter 7.

                     Does the Platform Have Complex
                     Event Processing?

                     Complex event processing (CEP) is a fashionable term to describe a program

                     responding to an event instantaneously and taking appropriate action. The

                     events that concern us are usually the arrival of a new tick, or the delivery

                     of a news item. For an algorithmic trader, one important point is that the

                     program is event driven, and not bar driven.That is, the program does not

                     go poll prices or news items at the end of each bar and then decide what to

                     do. Because CEP is event driven, there is no delay between the occurrence

36                   of an event and the response to it.
                        If instantaneity is the only strength of CEP, then we can just use the so-
ALGORITHMIC TRADING
                     called callback functions that almost every brokerage API provides. A call-

                     back function is also triggered whenever a new tick or news item arrives,

                     and based on this new data we can perform all kinds of computations and

                     determine whether to submit an order.This is easy when the rule required

                     is simply "moving average of the price over the last hour."

                     But what if the rules are "complex," such as "sell when the order flow in

                     the last half hour is positive, the price is above the moving average, the vola-

                     tility is low, and an important news item just arrived"?

                     What if the rule involves many clauses like during, between, afterwards, in

                     parallel when applied to the sequence of events?According to CEP aficionados,

                     it is much more succinct to express these complicated rules using a CEP lan-

                     guage than a traditional programming language. But what about the argument

                     that trading rules should be simple to avoid data-snooping bias? Their answer

                     is that they are not data mining the data to find arbitrary rules, but simply

                     implementing rules that seasoned traders already know are profitable. I am not

                     entirely convinced by their arguments, but if you are, you should know that

                     Progress Apama mentioned above is distinguished by their CEP technology.

                     Certain free, open-source IDEs have CEP, too, as you can see fromTable 1.2.
KEY POINTS

· Backtesting is useless if it is not predictive of future performance of a
   strategy, but pitfalls in backtesting will decrease its predictive power.

· Eliminating pitfalls:

· A platform that uses the same program for both backtesting and live
   executions can eliminate look-ahead bias.

· Out-of-sample testing, cross-validation, and high Sharpe ratios are
   all good practices for reducing data-snooping bias, but none is more
   definitive than walk-forward testing.

· Simple models are a simple cure for data-snooping bias.

· "Why did my model generate a `short' signal for THQI on 2012/7/9? Oh,
   that's because I forgot to adjust its historical prices for a 1:10 reverse
   stock split!"

· "Did your model just buy the stock CMC? Are you sure it didn't forget to
   adjust its historical prices because today is its ex-date for dividends?"

· "I see that your model is long only. Did you make sure your data don't
   have survivorship bias?"

· "The backtest of your mean-reverting stock-trading model using closing

prices is excellent, but expect a deflation of the results if you test it again

using primary exchange data."                                                    37

· "Your model performed brilliantly during November 2008. But did it short       BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

a lot of financial stocks back then? Don't forget that short sales of those

stocks were banned."

· "This high-frequency stock-trading model looks good on backtest, but I
   wonder if it incorporated uptick rules for their short trades."

· "Your futures calendar spread model uses the differences in price to form
   the spread. Why are you back-adjusting your prices using returns gap?"

· "Why is it that my mean-reverting intraday futures spread performed so
   well in backtest but so poorly in live trading? Oh, I should have used tick-
   based instead of bar-based data for my backtest."

· "Your backtest of this momentum strategy seems to be without any
   pitfalls. But just because it performed well before 2008 doesn't mean it
   will perform well afterward."

· Statistical significance of backtests:

· "What do you mean by saying that the expected APR of this strategy is
   10 percent and is statistically significant to within 1 percent?" Answer:
   "It means by running the strategy on 10,000 simulated price series with
   the same length and the same first three moments as the historical price
   series, there are only 100 sample series where the APR is equal to or
   greater than 10 percent."

                                                           (Continued )
                     · "What do you mean by saying that the expected APR of this strategy is
                        10 percent and is statistically significant to within 1 percent?" Alternative

                     answer: "It means by randomizing the entry dates of my trades, there is
                     only 1 in 100 random permutations where the APR is equal to or greater
                     than 10 percent."

                     · Which backtest platform to pick?

                     · "I am a brilliant mathematician starting a fund with $50 million to invest,

                     but I don't know how to program. What trading platform should I use?"

                     Pick an institutional special-purpose platform like Deltix, QuantHouse,
                     Progress Apama, or RTD Tango.

                     · "I am an experienced, discretionary, independent trader, and I want to
                        automate my strategies. What trading platform should I use?" Pick a retail

                     special-purpose platform like MetaTrader, NinjaTrader, Trading Blox, or
                     TradeStation.

                     · "I am a quant who is great with strategy research using MATLAB.
                        But how should I implement these strategies and go `live'?" Try

                     exchangeapi.com's quant2ib API for Interactive Brokers, quant2tt for

                     Trading Technologies, www.pracplay.com for other brokers, or MATFIX for
                     FIX connections.

                     · "I am a good C++, C#, and Java programmer, but I hate dealing with

                     low-level connections to the brokerage, and I hate having to rewrite my

38                   connections every time I change brokers." Try one of the IDEs such as

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  Marketcetera, TradeLink, AlgoTrader, or ActiveQuant.

                     · Automating executions:

                     · "I want to colocate my trading program at a data center to reduce my
                        order confirmation latency below 10 ms." Are you sure your broker has an

                     order confirmation latency shorter than 10 ms?

                     · "I am colocated at Amazon's EC2. Market data fed to my trading

                     programs should be much more up-to-date than getting them at my
                     desktop PC." Not necessarily: EC2's server may be farther away (in

                     Internet distance) from your broker's data server than your desktop PC.

                     · "I am using MATLAB's Parallel Computing Toolbox, and I run my

                     program on a GPU. Therefore, I can trade all 500 stocks in the SPX
                     simultaneously." Even with MATLAB's Parallel Computing Toolbox, you
                     are limited to handling 12 stocks simultaneously. Writing your own Java

                     or Python program will allow true multithreading on a graphics processing
                     unit (GPU).

                     · "My IDE isn't CEP enabled. I can't really run a tick-based trading
                        strategy." Even platforms that are not CEP enabled often have callback

                     functions that enable your program to be triggered by ticks.
                                                        CHAPTER 2

The Basics of
Mean Reversion

Whether we realize it or not, nature is filled with examples of mean
        reversion. Figure 2.1 shows the water level of the Nile from 622 ad
to 1284 ad, clearly a mean-reverting time series. Mean reversion is equally
prevalent in the social sciences. Daniel Kahneman cited a famous example:
the "Sports Illustrated jinx," which is the claim that "an athlete whose picture 39
appears on the cover of the magazine is doomed to perform poorly the fol-
lowing season" (Kahneman, 2011). The scientific reason is that an athlete's
performance can be thought of as randomly distributed around a mean, so
an exceptionally good performance one year (which puts the athlete on the
cover of Sports Illustrated) is very likely to be followed by performances that
are closer to the average.

   Is mean reversion also prevalent in financial price series? If so, our lives as
traders would be very simple and profitable! All we need to do is to buy low
(when the price is below the mean), wait for reversion to the mean price,
and then sell at this higher price, all day long. Alas, most price series are
not mean reverting, but are geometric random walks. The returns, not the
prices, are the ones that usually randomly distribute around a mean of zero.
Unfortunately, we cannot trade on the mean reversion of returns. (One
should not confuse mean reversion of returns with anti-serial-correlation
of returns, which we can definitely trade on. But anti-serial-correlation of
returns is the same as the mean reversion of prices.) Those few price series
that are found to be mean reverting are called stationary, and in this chapter
we will describe the statistical tests (ADF test and the Hurst exponent and
Variance Ratio test) for stationarity. There are not too many prefabricated
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGFIGURE 2.1 Minimum Water Levels of the Nile River, 622­1284 ad

40

        prices series that are stationary. By prefabricated I meant those price series
        that represent assets traded in the public exchanges or markets.

           Fortunately, we can manufacture many more mean-reverting price series
        than there are traded assets because we can often combine two or more
        individual price series that are not mean reverting into a portfolio whose
        net market value (i.e., price) is mean reverting.Those price series that can
        be combined this way are called cointegrating, and we will describe the
        statistical tests (CADF test and Johansen test) for cointegration, too. Also,
        as a by-product of the Johansen test, we can determine the exact weightings
        of each asset in order to create a mean reverting portfolio. Because of this
        possibility of artificially creating stationary portfolios, there are numerous
        opportunities available for mean reversion traders.

           As an illustration of how easy it is to profit from mean-reverting price
        series, I will also describe a simple linear trading strategy, a strategy that is
        truly "parameterless."

           One clarification:The type of mean reversion we will look at in this chap-
        ter may be called time series mean reversion because the prices are supposed
        to be reverting to a mean determined by its own historical prices.The tests
and trading strategies that I depict in this chapter are all tailored to time se-THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION
ries mean reversion.There is another kind of mean reversion, called "cross-
sectional" mean reversion. Cross-sectional mean reversion means that the
cumulative returns of the instruments in a basket will revert to the cumula-
tive return of the basket. This also implies that the short-term relative re-
turns of the instruments are serially anticorrelated. (Relative return of an
instrument is the return of that instrument minus the return of the basket.)
Since this phenomenon occurs most often for stock baskets, we will discuss
how to take advantage of it in Chapter 4 when we discuss mean-reverting
strategies for stocks and ETFs.

 Mean Reversion and Stationarity

Mean reversion and stationarity are two equivalent ways of looking at the
same type of price series, but these two ways give rise to two different sta-
tistical tests for such series.

   The mathematical description of a mean-reverting price series is that the
change of the price series in the next period is proportional to the difference
between the mean price and the current price. This gives rise to the ADF
test, which tests whether we can reject the null hypothesis that the propor- 41
tionality constant is zero.

   However, the mathematical description of a stationary price series is that
the variance of the log of the prices increases slower than that of a geo-
metric random walk. That is, their variance is a sublinear function of time,
rather than a linear function, as in the case of a geometric random walk.
This sublinear function is usually approximated by 2H, where  is the time
separating two price measurements, and H is the so-called Hurst exponent,
which is less than 0.5 if the price series is indeed stationary (and equal to
0.5 if the price series is a geometric random walk).The Variance Ratio test
can be used to see whether we can reject the null hypothesis that the Hurst
exponent is actually 0.5.

   Note that stationarity is somewhat of a misnomer: It doesn't mean that
the prices are necessarily range bound, with a variance that is independent
of time and thus a Hurst exponent of zero. It merely means that the variance
increases slower than normal diffusion.

   A clear mathematical exposition of the ADF and Variance Ratio tests can
be found in Walter Beckert's course notes (Beckert, 2011). Here, we are
interested only in their applications to practical trading strategies.
                     Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test

                     If a price series is mean reverting, then the current price level will tell us
                     something about what the price's next move will be: If the price level is
                     higher than the mean, the next move will be a downward move; if the price
                     level is lower than the mean, the next move will be an upward move. The
                     ADF test is based on just this observation.

                        We can describe the price changes using a linear model:

                     y(t) = y(t - 1) +  + t + 1y(t - 1) + ... + ky(t - k) + t (2.1)

                     where y(t)  y(t) - y(t - 1), y(t - 1)  y(t - 1) - y(t - 2), and so on.TheADF

                     test will find out if  = 0. If the hypothesis  = 0 can be rejected, that means the

                     next move y(t) depends on the current level y(t - 1), and therefore it is not a

                     random walk.The test statistic is the regression coefficient  (with y(t - 1) as

                     the independent variable and y(t) as the dependent variable) divided by the

                     standard error of the regression fit: /SE().The statisticians Dickey and Fuller

                     have kindly found out for us the distribution of this test statistic and tabulated

                     the critical values for us, so we can look up for any value of /SE() whether

                     the hypothesis can be rejected at, say, the 95 percent probability level.

42                      Notice that since we expect mean regression, /SE() has to be negative,
                     and it has to be more negative than the critical value for the hypothesis to
ALGORITHMIC TRADING
                     be rejected. The critical values themselves depend on the sample size and

                     whether we assume that the price series has a non-zero mean -/ or a

                     steady drift -t/. In practical trading, the constant drift in price, if any,

                     tends to be of a much smaller magnitude than the daily fluctuations in price.

                     So for simplicity we will assume this drift term to be zero ( = 0).

                     In Example 2.1, we apply the ADF test to a currency rate series

                     USD.CAD.

                             Example 2.1: Using ADF Test for Mean Reversion

                     The ADF test is available as a MATLAB Econometrics function adftest,
                     or from the open-source MATLAB package spatial-econometrics.com's
                     adf function.We will use adf below, and my code is available for
                     download as stationarityTests.m from http://epchan.com/book2.

                        (After you have downloaded the spatial-econometrics.com's jplv7
                     folder to your computer, remember to add all the subfolders of this
                     package to your MATLAB path before using it.)
             Example 2.1 (Continued)

The adf function has three inputs.The first is the price series in

ascending order of time (chronological order is important).The

second is a parameter indicating whether we should assume the

offset  and whether the drift  in Equation 2.1 should be zero.We

should assume the offset is nonzero, since the mean price toward

which the prices revert is seldom zero.We should, however, assume

the drift is zero, because the constant drift in price tends to be of a

much smaller magnitude than the daily fluctuations in price.These

considerations mean that the second parameter should be 0 (by the

package designer's convention).The third input is the lag k.You can

start by trying k = 0, but often only by setting k = 1 can we reject

the null hypothesis, meaning that the change in prices often does

have serial correlations.We will try the test on the exchange rate

USD.CAD (how many Canadian dollars in exchange for one U.S.

dollar).We assume that the daily prices at 17:00 ET are stored in

a MATLAB array .The data file is that of one-minute bars, but we

will just extract the end-of-day prices at 17:00 ET. Sampling the data

at intraday frequency will not increase the statistical significance of  43

the ADF test.We can see from Figure 2.2 that it does not look very       THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

stationary.

FIGURE 2.2 USD.CAD Price Series

                                      (Continued )
                                    Example 2.1 (Continued)

                        And indeed, you should find that the ADF test statistic is about
                     -1.84, but the critical value at the 90 percent level is -2.594, so we
                     can't reject the hypothesis that  is zero. In other words, we can't
                     show that USD.CAD is stationary, which perhaps is not surprising,
                     given that the Canadian dollar is known as a commodity currency,
                     while the U.S. dollar is not. But note that  is negative, which
                     indicates the price series is at least not trending.

                     results=adf(y, 0, 1);

                     prt(results);

                     % Augmented DF test for unit root variable:  variable 1

                     % ADF t-statistic      # of lags AR(1) estimate

                     %  -1.840744           1                  0.994120

                     %

                     % 1% Crit Value 5% Crit Value 10% Crit Value

                     %  -3.458              -2.871                -2.594

ALGORITHMIC TRADING44 Hurst Exponent andVariance RatioTest

        Intuitively speaking, a "stationary" price series means that the prices diffuse
        from its initial value more slowly than a geometric random walk would. Math-
        ematically, we can determine the nature of the price series by measuring this
        speed of diffusion.The speed of diffusion can be characterized by the variance

                                    Var() = |z(t + ) - z(t)|2             (2.2)

                     where z is the log prices (z = log( y)),  is an arbitrary time lag, and ... is
                     an average over all t's. For a geometric random walk, we know that

                                        |z(t + ) - z(t)|2                 (2.3)

                     The  means that this relationship turns into an equality with some pro-
                     portionality constant for large , but it may deviate from a straight line for
                     small . But if the (log) price series is mean reverting or trending (i.e., has
                     positive correlations between sequential price moves), Equation 2.3 won't
                     hold. Instead, we can write:

                                        |z(t + ) - z(t)|2  2H             (2.4)
where we have defined the Hurst exponent H. For a price series exhibiting
geometric random walk, H = 0.5. But for a mean-reverting series, H < 0.5,
and for a trending series, H > 0.5. As H decreases toward zero, the price
series is more mean reverting, and as H increases toward 1, the price series
is increasingly trending; thus, H serves also as an indicator for the degree of
mean reversion or trendiness.

   In Example 2.2, we computed the Hurst exponent for the same cur-
rency rate series USD.CAD that we used in the previous section using the
MATLAB code. It generates an H of 0.49, which suggests that the price
series is weakly mean reverting.

Example 2.2: Computing the Hurst Exponent

Using the same USD.CAD price series in the previous example, we

now compute the Hurst exponent using a function called genhurst we

can download from MATLAB Central (www.mathworks.com

/matlabcentral/fileexchange/30076-generalized-hurst-exponent).

This function computes a generalized version of the Hurst exponent

defined by |z(t + ) - z(t)|2q  2H(q), where q is an arbitrary                     45

number. But here we are only interested in q = 2, which we specify as             THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

the second input parameter to genhurst.

H=genhurst(log(y), 2);

   If we apply this function to USD.CAD, we get H = 0.49, indicating
that it may be weakly mean reverting.

   Because of finite sample size, we need to know the statistical significance
and MacKinlay of an estimated value of H to be sure whether we can reject
the null hypothesis that H is really 0.5.This hypothesis test is provided by the
Variance Ratio test (Lo, 2001).

   The Variance Ratio Test simply tests whether

                              Var(z(t) - z(t - ))
                              V ( ( ) - z(t -1))

is equal to 1.There is another ready-made MATLAB Econometrics Toolbox
function vratiotest for this, whose usage I demonstrate in Example 2.3.
                        Example 2.3: Using theVariance RatioTest for Stationarity

                     The vratiotest from MATALB Econometric Toolbox is applied to the
                     same USD.CAD price series y that have been used in the previous
                     examples in this chapter.The outputs are h and pValue: h = 1 means
                     rejection of the random walk hypothesis at the 90 percent confidence
                     level, h = 0 means it may be a random walk. pValue gives the
                     probability that the null (random walk) hypothesis is true.

                         [h,pValue]=vratiotest(log(y));

                     We find that h = 0 and pValue = 0.367281 for USD.CAD, indicating
                     that there is a 37 percent chance that it is a random walk, so we
                     cannot reject this hypothesis.

      Half-Life of Mean ReversionALGORITHMIC TRADING

        The statistical tests I described for mean reversion or stationarity are
        very demanding, with their requirements of at least 90 percent certainty.
46 But in practical trading, we can often be profitable with much less cer-
        tainty. In this section, we shall find another way to interpret the  coef-
        ficient in Equation 2.1 so that we know whether it is negative enough
        to make a trading strategy practical, even if we cannot reject the null
        hypothesis that its actual value is zero with 90 percent certainty in an
        ADF test.We shall find that  is a measure of how long it takes for a price
        to mean revert.

           To reveal this new interpretation, it is only necessary to transform the
        discrete time series Equation 2.1 to a differential form so that the changes in
        prices become infinitesimal quantities. Furthermore, if we ignore the drift
        (t) and the lagged differences (y(t - 1), ..., y(t - k)) in Equation 2.1, then
        it becomes recognizable in stochastic calculus as the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
        formula for mean-reverting process:

                     dy(t) = (y(t - 1) + )dt + d  (2.5)

                     where d is some Gaussian noise. In the discrete form of 2.1, linear regres-
                     sion of y(t) against y(t - 1) gave us , and once determined, this value of 

                     carries over to the differential form of 2.5. But the advantage of writing the
equation in the differential form is that it allows for an analytical solution for
the expected value of y(t):

E( y(t)) = y0exp(t) - /(1 - exp(t))  (2.6)

   Remembering that  is negative for a mean-reverting process, this tells us        THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION
that the expected value of the price decays exponentially to the value -/
with the half-life of decay equals to -log(2)/. This connection between a
regression coefficient  and the half-life of mean reversion is very useful
to traders. First, if we find that  is positive, this means the price series is
not at all mean reverting, and we shouldn't even attempt to write a mean-
reverting strategy to trade it. Second, if  is very close to zero, this means
the half-life will be very long, and a mean-reverting trading strategy will not
be very profitable because we won't be able to complete many round-trip
trades in a given time period. Third, this  also determines a natural time
scale for many parameters in our strategy. For example, if the half life is 20
days, we shouldn't use a look-back of 5 days to compute a moving average
or standard deviation for a mean-reversion strategy. Often, setting the look-
back to equal a small multiple of the half-life is close to optimal, and doing
so will allow us to avoid brute-force optimization of a free parameter based
on the performance of a trading strategy.We will demonstrate how to com- 47
pute half-life in Example 2.4.

    Example 2.4: Computing Half-Life for Mean Reversion

We concluded in the previous example that the price series
USD.CAD is not stationary with at least 90 percent probability. But
that doesn't necessarily mean we should give up trading this price
series using a mean reversion model because most profitable trading
strategies do not require such a high level of certainty.To determine
whether USD.CAD is a good candidate for mean reversion trading,
we will now determine its half-life of mean reversion.

   To determine  in Equations 2.1 and 2.5, we can run a regression
fit with y(t) - y(t - 1) as the dependent variable and y(t - 1) as
the independent variable.The regression function ols as well as the
function lag are both part of the jplv7 package. (You can also use the

                                                                      (Continued )
ALGORITHMIC TRADING                 Example 2.4 (Continued)

           MATLAB Statistics Toolbox regress function for this as well.) This code
           fragment is part of stationaryTests.m.

                      ylag=lag(y, 1); % lag is a function in the jplv7
                         % (spatial-econometrics.com) package.

                      deltaY=y-ylag;
                      deltaY(1)=[]; % Regression functions cannot handle the NaN

                         in the first bar of the time series.
                      ylag(1)=[];
                      regress_results=ols(deltaY, [ylag ones(size(ylag))]);
                      halflife=-log(2)/regress_results.beta(1);

                The result is about 115 days. Depending on your trading horizon, this
             may or may not be too long. But at least we know what look-back to use
             and what holding period to expect.

      A Linear Mean-RevertingTrading Strategy

48 Once we determine that a price series is mean reverting, and that the half-
        life of mean reversion for a price series short enough for our trading ho-
        rizon, we can easily trade this price series profitably using a simple linear
        strategy: determine the normalized deviation of the price (moving standard
        deviation divided by the moving standard deviation of the price) from its
        moving average, and maintain the number of units in this asset negatively
        proportional to this normalized deviation. The look-back for the moving
        average and standard deviation can be set to equal the half-life. We see in
        Example 2.5 how this linear mean reversion works for USD.CAD.
           You might wonder why it is necessary to use a moving average or standard
        deviation for a mean-reverting strategy at all. If a price series is stationary,
        shouldn't its mean and standard deviation be fixed forever? Though we usually
        assume the mean of a price series to be fixed, in practice it may change slowly
        due to changes in the economy or corporate management. As for the standard
        deviation, recall that Equation 2.4 implies even a "stationary" price series with
        0 < H < 0.5 has a variance that increases with time, though not as rapidly as a
        geometric random walk. So it is appropriate to use moving average and standard
        deviation to allow ourselves to adapt to an ever-evolving mean and standard de-
        viation, and also to capture profit more quickly.This point will be explored more
        thoroughly in Chapter 3, particularly in the context of "scaling-in."
Example 2.5: Backtesting a Linear Mean-Reverting
                     Trading Strategy

In this simple strategy, we seek to own a number of units of
USD.CAD equal to the negative normalized deviation from its
moving average.The market value (in USD) of one unit of a currency
pair USD.X is nothing but the quote USD.X, so in this case the
linear mean reversion is equivalent to setting the market value of
the portfolio to be the negative of the Z-Score of USD.CAD.The
functions movingAvg and movingStd can be downloaded from my
website. (This code fragment is part of stationaryTests.m.)

lookback=round(halflife); % setting lookback to the halflife
   % found above

mktVal=-(y-movingAvg(y, lookback))./movingStd(y, lookback);
pnl=lag(mktVal, 1).*(y-lag(y, 1))./lag(y, 1); % daily P&L of

   % the strategy

The cumulative P&L of this strategy is plotted in Figure 2.3.

Despite the long half-life, the total profit and loss (P&L) manages

to be positive, albeit with a large drawdown. As with most example

strategies in this book, we do not include transaction costs. Also,      49

there is a look-ahead bias involved in this particular example due to    THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

FIGURE 2.3 Equity Curve of Linear Trading Strategy on
AUDCAD.

                                                           (Continued )
ALGORITHMIC TRADING                 Example 2.5 (Continued)

           the use of in-sample data to find the half-life and therefore the look-
           back. Furthermore, an unlimited amount of capital may be needed
           to generate the P&L because there was no maximum imposed on
           the market value of the portfolio. So I certainly don't recommend
           it as a practical trading strategy. (There is a more practical version
           of this mean-reverting strategy in Chapter 5.) But it does illustrate
           that a nonstationary price series need not discourage us from trading
           a mean reversion strategy, and that we don't need very complicated
           strategies or technical indicators to extract profits from a mean-
           reverting series.

           Since the goal for traders is ultimately to determine whether the ex-
        pected return or Sharpe ratio of a mean-reverting trading strategy is good
        enough, why do we bother to go through the stationarity tests (ADF orVari-
        ance Ratio) and the calculation of half-life at all? Can't we just run a backtest
50 on the trading strategy directly and be done with it? The reason why we
        went through all these preliminary tests is that their statistical significance is
        usually higher than a direct backtest of a trading strategy.These preliminary
        tests make use of every day's (or, more generally, every bar's) price data for
        the test, while a backtest usually generates a significantly smaller number
        of round trip trades for us to collect performance statistics. Furthermore,
        the outcome of a backtest is dependent on the specifics of a trading strategy,
        with a specific set of trading parameters. However, given a price series that
        passed the stationarity statistical tests, or at least one with a short enough
        half-life, we can be assured that we can eventually find a profitable trading
        strategy, maybe just not the one that we have backtested.

        Cointegration

        As we stated in the introduction of this chapter, most financial price series
        are not stationary or mean reverting. But, fortunately, we are not confined to
        trading those "prefabricated" financial price series: We can proactively cre-
        ate a portfolio of individual price series so that the market value (or price)
        series of this portfolio is stationary.This is the notion of cointegration: If we
can find a stationary linear combination of several nonstationary price se-           THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION
ries, then these price series are called cointegrated. The most common com-
bination is that of two price series: We long one asset and simultaneously
short another asset, with an appropriate allocation of capital to each asset.
This is the familiar "pairs trading" strategy. But the concept of cointegration
easily extends to three or more assets. And in this section, we will look at
two common cointegration tests: the CADF and the Johansen test.The for-
mer is suitable only for a pair of price series, while the latter is applicable to
any number of series.

Cointegrated Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test

An inquisitive reader may ask: Why do we need any new tests for the sta-
tionarity of the portfolio price series, when we already have the trusty ADF
and Variance Ratio tests for stationarity? The answer is that given a number
of price series, we do not know a priori what hedge ratios we should use to
combine them to form a stationary portfolio. (The hedge ratio of a particu-
lar asset is the number of units of that asset we should be long or short in a
portfolio. If the asset is a stock, then the number of units corresponds to the
number of shares. A negative hedge ratio indicates we should be short that
asset.) Just because a set of price series is cointegrating does not mean that 51
any random linear combination of them will form a stationary portfolio. But
pursuing this line of thought further, what if we first determine the optimal
hedge ratio by running a linear regression fit between two price series, use
this hedge ratio to form a portfolio, and then finally run a stationarity test on
this portfolio price series?This is essentially what Engle and Granger (1987)
did. For our convenience, the spatial-econometrics.com jplv7 package has
provided a cadf function that performs all these steps. Example 2.6 demon-
strates how to use this function by applying it to the two exchange-traded
funds (ETFs) EWA and EWC.

         Example 2.6: Using the CADF Test for Cointegration

   ETFs provide a fertile ground for finding cointegrating price
   series--and thus good candidates for pair trading. For example, both
   Canadian and Australian economies are commodity based, so they
   seem likely to cointegrate.The program cointegrationTest.m can be
   downloaded from my website.We assume the price series of EWA is

                                                                          (Continued )
                                           Example 2.6 (Continued)

                     FIGURE 2.4 Share Prices of EWA versus EWC

                     contained in the array x, and that of EWC is contained in the array y.

                     From Figure 2.4, we can see that they do look quite cointegrating.

52                   A scatter plot of EWA versus EWC in Figure 2.5 is even more

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  convincing, as the price pairs fall on a straight line.

                     We can use the ols function found in the jplv7 package to find the

                     optimal hedge ratio.

                     FIGURE 2.5 Scatter Plot of EWA versus EWC
Example 2.6 (Continued)

regression_result=ols(y, [x ones(size(x))]);
hedgeRatio=regression_result.beta(1);

As expected, the plot of the residual EWC-hedgeRatio*EWA in

Figure 2.6 does look very stationary.

We use the cadf function of the jplv7 package for our test. Other

than an extra input for the second price series, the inputs are the

same as the adf function.We again assume that there can be a nonzero

offset of the pair portfolio's price series, but the drift is zero. Note

that in both the regression and the CADF test we have chosen EWA

to be the independent variable x, and EWC to be the dependent

variable y. If we switch the roles of EWA and EWC, will the result

for the CADF test differ? Unfortunately, the answer is "yes." The

hedge ratio derived from picking EWC as the independent variable

will not be the exact reciprocal of the one derived from picking EWA

as the independent variable. In many cases (though not for EWA-

EWC, as we shall confirm later with Johansen test), only one of those

hedge ratios is "correct," in the sense that only one hedge ratio will    53

lead to a stationary portfolio. If you use the CADF test, you would

have to try each variable as independent and see which order gives        THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

the best (most negative) t-statistic, and use that order to obtain the

FIGURE 2.6 Stationarity of Residuals of Linear
Regression between EWA versus EWC

                                                (Continued )
                                Example 2.6 (Continued)

                     hedge ratio. For brevity, we will just assume EWA to be independent,
                     and run the CADF test.

                         results=cadf(y, x, 0, 1);
                         % Print out results
                         prt(results);

                     % Output:

                     % Augmented DF test for co-integration variables:
                           % variable 1,variable 2

                     % CADF t-statistic  # of lags AR(1) estimate

                     %  -3.64346635      1               -0.020411

                     %

                     % 1% Crit Value 5% Crit Value 10% Crit Value

                     %          -3.880   -3.359          -3.038

                     %          -3.880   -3.359          -3.038

                     We find that the ADF test statistic is about ­3.64, certainly more

                     negative than the critical value at the 95 percent level of ­3.359. So

                     we can reject the null hypothesis that  is zero. In other words, EWA

54                   and EWC are cointegrating with 95 percent certainty.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  Johansen Test

                     In order to test for cointegration of more than two variables, we need to
                     use the Johansen test.To understand this test, let's generalize Equation 2.1
                     to the case where the price variable y(t) are actually vectors representing
                     multiple price series, and the coefficients  and  are actually matrices.
                     (Because I do not think it is practical to allow for a constant drift in the
                     price of a stationary portfolio, we will assume t = 0 for simplicity.) Using
                     English and Greek capital letters to represent vectors and matrices respec-
                     tively, we can rewrite Equation 2.1 as

                            Y(t) = Y(t - 1) + M + A1Y(t - 1) + ... + Ak Y(t - k) + t (2.7)

                        Just as in the univariate case, if  = 0, we do not have cointegration.
                     (Recall that if the next move of Y doesn't depend on the current price level,
                     there can be no mean reversion.) Let's denote the rank (remember this
quaint linear algebraic term?) of  as r, and the number of price series n.                THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION
The number of independent portfolios that can be formed by various linear
combinations of the cointegrating price series is equal to r.The Johansen test
will calculate r for us in two different ways, both based on eigenvector de-
composition of . One test produces the so-called trace statistic, and other
produces the eigen statistic. (A good exposition can be found in Sorensen,
2005.) We need not worry what they are exactly, since the jplv7 package
will provide critical values for each statistic to allow us to test whether we
can reject the null hypotheses that r = 0 (no cointegrating relationship),
r  1, ..., up to r  n ­ 1. If all these hypotheses are rejected, then clearly
we have r = n. As a useful by-product, the eigenvectors found can be used
as our hedge ratios for the individual price series to form a stationary port-
folio.We show how to run this test on the EWA-EWC pair in Example 2.7,
where we find that the Johansen test confirms the CADF test's conclusion
that this pair is cointegrating. But, more interestingly, we add another ETF
to the mix: IGE, an ETF consisting of natural resource stocks. We will see
how many cointegrating relations can be found from these three price se-
ries.We also use the eigenvectors to form a stationary portfolio, and find out
its half-life for mean reversion.

                                                                                        55

       Example 2.7: Using the Johansen Test for Cointegration

   We take the EWA and EWC price series that we used in Example
   2.6 and apply the Johansen test to them.There are three inputs to
   the johansen function of the jplv7 package: y, p, and k. y is the input
   matrix, with each column vector representing one price series. As in
   the ADF and CADF tests, we set p = 0 to allow the Equation 2.7 to
   have a constant offset (M  0), but not a constant drift term ( = 0).
   The input k is the number of lags, which we again set to 1. (This code
   fragment is part of cointegrationTests.m.)

        % Combine the two time series into a matrix y2 for input
           % into Johansen test

        y2=[y, x];
        results=johansen(y2, 0, 1);
        % Print out results

        prt(results);

                                                                          (Continued )
                                    Example 2.7 (Continued)

                     % Output:

                     Johansen MLE estimates

                     NULL:          Trace Statistic  Crit 90%    Crit 95%    Crit 99%
                                                        13.429      15.494      19.935
                     r <= 0 variable 1       19.983       2.705       3.841       6.635

                     r <= 1 variable 2       3.983

                     NULL:          Eigen Statistic  Crit 90%    Crit 95%    Crit 99%
                     r <= 0                             12.297      14.264      18.520
                     r <= 1  variable 1      16.000       2.705       3.841       6.635

                             variable 2      3.983

                     We see that for the Trace Statistic test, the hypothesis r = 0 is
                     rejected at the 99% level, and r  1 is rejected at the 95 percent
                     level. The Eigen Statistic test concludes that hypothesis r = 0
                     is rejected at the 95 percent level, and r  1 is rejected at the

                     95 percent as well. This means that from both tests, we conclude

                     that there are two cointegrating relationships between EWA and

                     EWC.

                     What does it mean to have two cointegrating relations when

56                   we have only two price series? Isn't there just one hedge ratio that

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  will allocate capital between EWA and EWC to form a stationary

                     portfolio? Actually, no. Remember when we discussed the CADF

                     test, we pointed out that it is order dependent. If we switched the

                     role of the EWA from the independent to dependent variable, we

                     may get a different conclusion. Similarly, when we use EWA as

                     the dependent variable in a regression against EWC, we will get a

                     different hedge ratio than when we use EWA as the independent

                     variable.These two different hedge ratios, which are not necessarily

                     reciprocal of each other, allow us to form two independent stationary

                     portfolios.With the Johansen test, we do not need to run the

                     regression two times to get those portfolios: Running it once will

                     generate all the independent cointegrating relations that exist.The

                     Johansen test, in other words, is independent of the order of the

                     price series.

                        Now let us introduce another ETF to the portfolio: IGE, which
                     consists of natural resource stocks. Assuming that its price series is
                     contained in an array z, we will run the Johansen test on all three
                     price series to find out how many cointegrating relationships we can
                     get out of this trio.
           Example 2.7 (Continued)

y3=[y2, z];
results=johansen(y3, 0, 1);
% Print out results
prt(results);

% Output:

% Johansen MLE estimates

% NULL:    Trace Statistic                   Crit 90%    Crit 95%    Crit 99%
                                                27.067      29.796      35.463
% r <= 0 variable 1 34.429                      13.429      15.494      19.935
                                                  2.705       3.841       6.635
% r <= 1 variable 2 17.532
                                             Crit 90%    Crit 95%    Crit 99%
% r <= 2 variable 3  4.471                      18.893      21.131      25.865
                                                12.297      14.264      18.520
%                                                 2.705       3.841       6.635

% NULL:    Eigen Statistic

% r <= 0 variable 1 16.897

% r <= 1 variable 2 13.061

% r <= 2 variable 3  4.471

Both Trace statistic and Eigen statistic tests conclude that we should

have three cointegrating relations with 95 percent certainty.

The eigenvalues and eigenvectors are contained in the arrays                         57

results.eig and results.evec, respectively.                                          THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

results.eig % Display the eigenvalues

% ans =

%

%  0.0112

%  0.0087

%  0.0030

results.evec % Display the eigenvectors

% ans =

%

% -1.0460  -0.5797   -0.2647
           -0.1120   -0.0790
%  0.7600
            0.5316    0.0952
%  0.2233

Notice that the eigenvectors (represented as column vectors in

results.evec) are ordered in decreasing order of their corresponding

eigenvalues. So we should expect the first cointegrating relation to be
                                                                       (Continued )
                                  Example 2.7 (Continued)

                     the "strongest"; that is, have the shortest half-life for mean reversion.
                     Naturally, we pick this eigenvector to form our stationary portfolio
                     (the eigenvector determines the shares of each ETF), and we can find
                     its half-life by the same method as before when we were dealing with
                     a stationary price series.The only difference is that we now have to
                     compute the T × 1 array yport, which represents the net market value
                     (price) of the portfolio, which is equal to the number of shares of
                     each ETF multiplied by the share price of each ETF, then summed
                     over all ETFs. yport takes the role of y in Example 2.4.

                         yport=smartsum(repmat(results.evec(:, 1)', [size(y3, 1) ...
                            1]).*y3, 2);

                     % Find value of lambda and thus the half-life of mean
                        % reversion by linear regression fit

                     ylag=lag(yport, 1); % lag is a function in the jplv7
                        % (spatial-econometrics.com) package.

                     deltaY=yport-ylag;

                     deltaY(1)=[]; % Regression functions cannot handle the NaN

                     % in the first bar of the time series.

58                   ylag(1)=[];

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  regress_results=ols(deltaY, [ylag ones(size(ylag))]);

                     halflife=-log(2)/regress_results.beta(1);

                     The half-life of 23 days is considerably shorter than the 115 days for
                     USD.CAD, so we expect a mean reversion trading strategy to work
                     better for this triplet.

                     Linear Mean-RevertingTrading on a Portfolio

                     In Example 2.7 we determined that the EWA-EWC-IGE portfolio formed
                     with the "best" eigenvector from the Johansen test has a short half-life. We
                     can now confidently proceed to backtest our simple linear mean-reverting
                     strategy on this portfolio. The idea is the same as before when we own a
                     number of units in USD.CAD proportional to their negative normalized de-
                     viation from its moving average (i.e., its Z-Score). Here, we also accumulate
                     units of the portfolio proportional to the negative Z-Score of the "unit" port-
                     folio's price.A unit portfolio is one with shares determined by the Johansen
                     eigenvector. The share price of a unit portfolio is like the share price of a
mutual fund or ETF: it is the same as its market value.When a unit portfolio
has only a long and a short position in two instruments, it is usually called a
spread. (We express this in more mathematical form in Chapter 3.)

   Note that by a "linear" strategy we mean only that the number of units
invested is proportional to the Z-Score, not that the market value of our
investment is proportional.

   This linear mean-reverting strategy is obviously not a practical strategy, at
least in its simplest version, as we do not know the maximum capital required

Example 2.8: Backtesting a Linear Mean-Reverting
                 Strategy on a Portfolio

The yport is a Tx1 array representing the net market value of the

"unit" portfolio calculated in the preceding code fragment. numUnits

is a Tx1 array representing the multiples of this unit portfolio we

wish to purchase. (The multiple is a negative number if we wish

to short the unit portfolio.) All other variables are as previously

calculated.The positions is a Tx3 array representing the position

(market value) of each ETF in the portfolio we have invested in.                     59
(This code fragment is part of cointegrationTests.m.)
                                                                                     THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION
    % Apply a simple linear mean reversion strategy to EWA-EWC-
       % IGE

    lookback=round(halflife); % setting lookback to the halflife
       % found above

    numUnits =-(yport-movingAvg(yport, lookback))...
       ./movingStd(yport, lookback); % multiples of unit
       % portfolio . movingAvg and movingStd are functions from
       % epchan.com/book2

    positions=repmat(numUnits, [1 size(y3, 2)]).*repmat(results. ...
       evec(:, 1)', [size(y3, 1) 1]).*y3;
       % results.evec(:, 1)' is the shares allocation, while
       % positions is the capital (dollar)
       % allocation in each ETF.

    pnl=sum(lag(positions, 1).*(y3-lag(y3, 1))./lag(y3, 1), 2);
       % daily P&L of the strategy

    ret=pnl./sum(abs(lag(positions, 1)), 2); % return is P&L
       % divided by gross market value of portfolio

  Figure 2.7 displays the cumulative returns curve of this linear mean-
reverting strategy for a stationary portfolio of EWA, EWC, and IGE.

                                                                       (Continued )
ALGORITHMIC TRADING                 Example 2.8 (Continued)

                           FIGURE 2.7 Cumulative Returns of a Linear Trading
                           Strategy on EWA-EWC-IGE Stationary Portfolio

           We find that APR = 12.6 percent with a Sharpe ratio of 1.4 for the
           strategy.
60

        at the outset and we cannot really enter and exit an infinitesimal number of
        shares whenever the price moves by an infinitesimal amount. Despite such
        impracticalities, the importance of backtesting a mean-reverting price series
        with this simple linear strategy is that it shows we can extract profits with-
        out any data-snooping bias, as the strategy has no parameters to optimize.
        (Remember that even the look-back is set equal to the half-life, a quantity that
        depends on the properties of the price series itself, not our specific trading
        strategy.) Also, as the strategy continuously enters and exits positions, it is
        likely to have more statistical significance than any other trading strategies that
        have more complicated and selective entry and exit rules.

        Pros and Cons of Mean-Reverting Strategies

        It is often fairly easy to construct mean-reverting strategies because we are
        not limited to trading instruments that are intrinsically stationary. We can
        pick and choose from a great variety of cointegrating stocks and ETFs to
        create our own stationary, mean-reverting portofolio. The fact that every
year there are new ETFs created that may be just marginally different from      THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION
existing ones certainly helps our cause, too.

   Besides the plethora of choices, there is often a good fundamental story
behind a mean-reverting pair.Why does EWA cointegrate with EWC?That's
because both the Canadian and the Australian economies are dominated by
commodities. Why does GDX cointegrate with GLD? That's because the
value of gold-mining companies is very much based on the value of gold.
Even when a cointegrating pair falls apart (stops cointegrating), we can of-
ten still understand the reason. For example, as we explain in Chapter 4,
the reason GDX and GLD fell apart around the early part of 2008 was high
energy prices, which caused mining gold to be abnormally expensive. We
hope that with understanding comes remedy.This availability of fundamen-
tal reasoning is in contrast to many momentum strategies whose only justi-
fication is that there are investors who are slower than we are in reacting to
the news. More bluntly, we must believe there are greater fools out there.
But those fools do eventually catch up to us, and the momentum strategy in
question may just stop working without explanation one day.

   Another advantage of mean-reverting strategies is that they span a great
variety of time scales. At one extreme, market-making strategies rely on
prices that mean-revert in a matter of seconds. At the other extreme, fun- 61
damental investors invest in undervalued stocks for years and patiently wait
for their prices to revert to their "fair" value.The short end of the time scale
is particularly beneficial to traders like ourselves, since a short time scale
means a higher number of trades per year, which in turn translates to higher
statistical confidence and higher Sharpe ratio for our backtest and live trad-
ing, and ultimately higher compounded return of our strategy.

   Unfortunately, it is because of the seemingly high consistency of mean-
reverting strategy that may lead to its eventual downfall. As Michael
Dever pointed out, this high consistency often lulls traders into over-
confidence and overleverage as a result (Dever, 2011). (Think Long Term
Capital Management.) When a mean-reverting strategy suddenly breaks
down, perhaps because of a fundamental reason that is discernible only
in hindsight, it often occurs when we are trading it at maximum leverage
after an unbroken string of successes. So the rare loss is often very painful
and sometimes catastrophic. Hence, risk management for mean reverting
is particularly important, and particularly difficult since the usual stop
losses cannot be logically deployed. In Chapter 8, I discuss why this is the
case, as well as techniques for risk management that are suitable for mean-
reverting strategies.
           KEY POINTS

               · Mean reversion means that the change in price is proportional to the
                  difference between the mean price and the current price.

               · Stationarity means that prices diffuse slower than a geometric random walk.
               · The ADF test is designed to test for mean reversion.
               · The Hurst exponent and Variance Ratio tests are designed to test for

                  stationarity.
               · Half-life of mean reversion measures how quickly a price series reverts to its

                  mean, and is a good predictor of the profitability or Sharpe ratio of a mean-
                  reverting trading strategy when applied to this price series.
               · A linear trading strategy here means the number of units or shares of a unit
                  portfolio we own is proportional to the negative Z-Score of the price series
                  of that portfolio.
               · If we can combine two or more nonstationary price series to form a
                  stationary portfolio, these price series are called cointegrating.
               · Cointegration can be measured by either CADF test or Johansen test.
               · The eigenvectors generated from the Johansen test can be used as hedge
                  ratios to form a stationary portfolio out of the input price series, and the one
                  with the largest eigenvalue is the one with the shortest half-life.

62

ALGORITHMIC TRADING
                                                        CHAPTER 3

Implementing
Mean Reversion
Strategies

In the previous chapter, we described the statistical tests for determining    63
  whether a price series is stationary and therefore suitable for mean re-
version trading. This price series may be the market value of a single asset,

though it is rare that such stationary assets exist, or it may be the market

value of a portfolio of cointegrating assets, such as the familiar long-short

stock pair.

In practice, though, we should remember that we don't necessarily

need true stationarity or cointegration in order to implement a success-

ful mean reversion strategy: If we are clever, we can capture short-term

or seasonal mean reversion, and liquidate our positions before the pric-

es go to their next equilibrium level. (Seasonal mean reversion means

that a price series will mean-revert only during specific periods of the

day or under specific conditions.) Conversely, not all stationary series

will lead to great profits--not if their half-life for mean reversion is

10 years long.

We also described a simple linear mean reversion strategy that sim-

ply "scales" into an asset in proportion to its price's deviation from the

mean. It is not a very practical strategy due to the constant infinitesimal

rebalancing and the demand of unlimited buying power. In this chapter,

we discuss a more practical, but still simple, mean reversion strategy--
                     the Bollinger bands. We describe variations of this technique, including
                     the pros and cons of using multiple entry and exit levels ("scaling-in"),
                     and the use of the Kalman filter to estimate the hedge ratio and mean
                     price. Finally, we highlight the danger data errors pose to mean-reverting
                     strategies.

                        In presenting the backtests of any strategy in this book, we do not in-
                     clude transaction costs.We sometimes even commit a more egregious er-
                     ror of introducing look-ahead bias by using the same data for parameter
                     optimization (such as finding the best hedge ratio) and for backtest.These
                     are all pitfalls that we warned about in Chapter 1. The only excuse for
                     doing this is that it makes the presentation and source codes simpler to
                     understand. I urge readers to undertake the arduous task of cleaning up
                     such pitfalls when implementing their own backtests of these prototype
                     strategies.

                      Trading Pairs Using Price Spreads, Log Price
                        Spreads, or Ratios

        In constructing a portfolio for mean reversion trading in Chapter 2, weALGORITHMIC TRADING
64 simply used the market value of the "unit" portfolio as the trading signal.

        This market value or price is just the weighted sums of the constituent price
        series, where the weights are the hedge ratios we found from linear regres-
        sion or from the eigenvectors of the Johansen test:

                     y = h1y1 + h2 y2 + ... + hn yn                       (3.1)

                     y is, by construction, a stationary time series, and the hi's tell us the number
                     of shares of each constituent stock (assuming we are trading a stock portfo-
                     lio). In the case of just two stocks, this reduces to a spread familiar to many
                     pair traders:

                     y = y1 - h y2.                                       (3.2)

                     (We inserted a minus sign in Equation 3.2 to anticipate the fact that we will
                     usually be long one stock and short another, so that h as defined this way will
                     be positive.) Suppose instead of price series, we find that the log of prices
                     are cointegrating, such that

                     log(q) = h1log( y1) + h2log( y2) + ... + hnlog( yn)  (3.3)
is stationary for some set of h's derived from either a regression fit or Johan-  IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES
sen's eigenvectors. How do we interpret this equation, since q (for "query")
is just a name given to a stationary time series that may or may not be the
market value of a portfolio? To find out its properties, let's take its first dif-
ference in time:

          log(q) = h1log( y1) + h2log( y2) + ... + hnlog ( yn). (3.4)

   Remembering that  log (x)  log (x(t)) - log (x (t - 1)) = log (x(t)/x(t - 1))
  x/x for small changes in x, the right hand side of Equation 3.4 be-
comes h1 y1/y1 + h2  y2/y2 + ... + hn  yn/yn, which is none other than
the returns of a portfolio consisting of the n assets with weights h's. But
unlike the hedge ratio h's in Equation 3.1 where they referred to the
number of shares of each asset, here we can set the market value of each
asset to h. So we can interpret q as the market value of a portfolio of assets
with prices y1, y2, ..., yn and with constant capital weights h1, h2, ..., hn,
together with a cash component implicitly included, and this market val-
ue will form a stationary time series. Note that a cash component must
be implicitly included in the portfolio q because if the capital weights
h's are kept constant, there is no other way that the market value of the
portfolio can vary with time.This cash does not show up in Equation 3.4 65
because its market value, of course, doesn't change from t - 1 to t as a
result of market movement, but its value will change at t when the trader
rebalances the portfolio to maintain the constancy of the capital weights,
realizing some of the gains or losses, and adding to or subtracting from
the cash balance. So to keep the market value of this portfolio stationary
(but not constant!) requires a lot of work for the traders, as they need
to constantly rebalance the portfolio, which is necessitated by using the
log of prices.

   The upshot of all these is that mean reversion trading using price
spreads is simpler than using log price spreads, but both can be theo-
retically justified if both price and log price series are cointegrating. But
what about the ratio of prices y1/y2 that many traders favor as the signal
for a pair? If we look at Equation 3.1 in the case of just two price se-
ries, we notice that if h1 = -h2, then indeed log( y1/y2) or y1/y2 is sta-
tionary. But this is a special case: We normally don't expect the hedge
ratios to be equal in magnitude, or equal to -1 if we normalize them.
So the ratio y1/y2 does not necessarily form a stationary series. But as
one reader mentioned, using ratios may have an advantage when the
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGunderlying pair is not truly cointegrating (http://epchan.blogspot
        .com/2012/02/ideas-from-psychologist.html?showComment=132980
        1874131#c3278677864367113894). Suppose price A = $10 and price
        B = $5 initially, so the ratio is 2. After some time, price A increases to
        $100 and price B to $50. The spread has gone from $5 to $50, and we
        will probably find that it is not stationary. But the ratio remains 2, and a
        mean-reverting strategy that trades based on ratio can be equally effec-
        tive whether their prices are $10 versus $5 or $100 versus $50. In other
        words, if your two assets are not really cointegrating but you believe their
        spread is still mean reverting on a short time frame, then using ratio as an
        indicator may work better than either price spreads or log price spreads.
        (This is the same idea as using moving average and standard deviation in
        our linear mean-reverting strategy.)

           There is another good reason to use ratio when a pair is not truly coin-
        tegrating. For such pairs, we often need to use a dynamically changing
        hedge ratio to construct the spread. But we can dispense with this trouble
        if we use the ratio as a signal in this situation. But does a ratio work bet-
        ter than an adaptive hedge ratio with price (or log price) spreads? I don't
        know a general answer to this, but we can look at Example 3.1, where
66 we compare the use of price spreads, log price spreads, and ratios in
        the linear mean reversion strategy involving GLD and USO, the gold
        and the crude oil exchange-traded funds (ETFs). You will find, in that
        example at least, price spreads with an adaptive hedge ratio work much
        better than ratio.

           An interesting special case is currency trading. If we trade the currency
        pair EUR.GBP, we are using ratio because this is exactly equal to trading
        EUR.USD/GBP.USD. We already demonstrated a simple mean-reverting
        strategy on trading such currency pairs in Example 2.5 for USD.CAD using
        ratio as the signal. But about those pairs that have no ready-made cross rates
        on many brokerages or exchanges, such as MXN.NOK? Should we use the
        ratio USD.NOK/USD.MXN as the signal, or the spread USD.NOK­USD
        .MXN instead? Again, because MXN.NOK is not truly stationary, using the
        ratio MXN.NOK may be more effective. This is true even though we can't
        directly trade MXN.NOK, and have to trade USD.NOK and USD.MXN
        instead. (Trading USD.NOK and USD.MXN will generate profit and loss
        [P&L] denominated in both NOK and MXN. Trading MXN.NOK would
        have generated P&L denominated only in NOK. So the two methods are
        not identical.)
          Example 3.1: Trading Price Spread, Log Price
                           Spread, and Ratio

We apply the linear mean-reverting strategy from Examples 2.5 and
2.8 to the ETFs GLD and USO. But we try this strategy on the price
spread, log price spread, and ratio for comparison.

   Some traders believe that when oil prices go up, so do gold prices.
The logic is that high oil price drives up inflation, and gold prices are
positively correlated with inflation. But you can verify using one of
the cointegration tests we studied in Chapter 2 that gold (represented
by the ETF GLD) and oil prices (represented by USO) are not, in
fact, cointegrated. (We will gloss over the difference between spot
oil prices versus oil futures, which actually constitute USO.We will
come back to this difference in Chapter 5). Nevertheless, we will
see if there is enough short-term mean reversion to make a mean-
reverting strategy profitable.

We will first try the price spread as the signal. But we need to

dynamically recalculate the hedge ratio every day using a short look-

back period (set to near-optimal 20 trading days with the benefit

of hindsight) in order to adapt to the changing levels of the ETFs         67

over time.The method we used to calculate the hedge ratio is linear        IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES

regression, using the ols function from the jplv7 package as before.

You can, of course, use the first eigenvector from the Johansen test

instead.

   The MATLAB source code can be downloaded from my website as
PriceSpread.m.We assume the price series of GLD is contained in the
Tx1 array x, and that of USO is contained in the Tx1 array y. Note
that what is usually referred to as the "spread" USO-hedgeRatio*GLD
is equal to the price of the unit portfolio, which we denote as yport in
the program.

% lookback period for calculating the dynamically changing
   % hedge ratio

lookback=20;

hedgeRatio=NaN(size(x, 1), 1);

for t=lookback:size(hedgeRatio, 1)

regression_result=ols(y(t-lookback+1:t), ...
   [x(t-lookback+1:t) ones(lookback, 1)]);

hedgeRatio(t)=regression_result.beta(1);

                                              (Continued )
                     Example 3.1 (Continued)

                     end
                     y2=[x y];
                     yport=sum([-hedgeRatio ones(size(hedgeRatio))].*y2, 2);

                        Plotting this spread in Figure 3.1 shows that it looks very
                     stationary.We will now see if we can create a profitable linear mean
                     reversion strategy. Once again, the number of units (shares) of the
                     unit portfolio we should own is set to be the negative Z-Score, and
                     the Tx2 positions array represents the market value (in dollars) of each
                     of the constituent ETFs we should be invested in.

                         numUnits=-(spread-movingAvg(spread, lookback)) ...
                            ./movingStd(spread, lookback);

                         positions=repmat(numUnits, [1 size(y2, 2)]).*[hedgeRatio ...
                            -ones(size(hedgeRatio))].*y2; pnl=sum(lag(positions, ...
                            1).*(y2-lag(y2, 1))./lag(y2, 1), 2); % daily P&L of the
                            % strategy

                         ret=pnl./sum(abs(lag(positions, 1)), 2); % return is P&L
                            % divided by gross market value of portfolio

68                   We obtain an annual percentage rate (APR) of about 10.9 percent

                     and Sharpe ratio of about 0.59 using price spread with a dynamic hedge

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  ratio, even though GLD and USO are by no means cointegrated.

                     Next, we will see if using log prices will make any difference.The

                     source code for this is in LogPriceSpread.m, but we will display here

                     the only two lines that are different from PriceSpread.m:

                     FIGURE 3.1 Spread between USO and GLD Using a
                     Changing Hedge Ratio
Example 3.1 (Continued)

regression_result=ols(log(y(t-lookback+1:t)), ...
   [log(x(t-lookback+1:t)) ones(lookback, 1)]);

and

    yport=sum([-hedgeRatio ones(size(hedgeRatio))].*log(y2), ...
       2); % The net market value of the portfolio is same as
       % the "spread"

   The APR of 9 percent and Sharpe ratio of 0.5 are actually
lower than the ones using the price spread strategy, and this is
before accounting for the extra transactions costs associated with
rebalancing the portfolio every day to maintain the capital allocation
to each ETF.

   Next, we will try using ratio as the signal. In this case, we will also
require the long and short side to have the same dollar capital.The
source code is in Ratio.m. It is interesting to look at a plot of the ratio
in Figure 3.2 first.

You can see that the ratio actually doesn't look very stationary at

all, compared with either the price spread or adaptive hedge ratio.          69

So it should not surprise us if we find the mean-reverting strategy to       IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES

perform poorly, with a negative APR.

FIGURE 3.2 Ratio = USO/GLD

                                                   (Continued )
ALGORITHMIC TRADING                 Example 3.1 (Continued)

                      lookback=20; % Lookback is set arbitrarily
                      ratio=y./x;
                      ratio(1:lookback)=[]; % Removed to have same test set as

                         % price spread and log price spread strategies
                      x(1:lookback)=[];
                      y(1:lookback)=[];

                      % Apply a simple linear mean reversion strategy to GLD-USO
                      numUnits=-(ratio-movingAvg(ratio, lookback))...

                         ./movingStd(ratio, lookback); positions=repmat(numUnits, ...
                         [1 2]).*[-ones(size(x, 1), 1) ones(size(x, 1), 1)];
                         pnl=sum(lag(positions, 1).*([x y]-lag([x y], 1)). ...
                         /lag([x y], 1), 2); ret=pnl./sum(abs(lag(positions, 1)), 2);

        Bollinger Bands

        The only mean-reversal strategy I have described so far is the linear strat-
        egy: simply scale the number of units invested in a stationary unit portfolio
70 to be proportional to the deviation of the market value (price) of the unit
        portfolio from a moving average. This simple strategy is chosen because it
        is virtually parameterless, and therefore least subject to data-snooping bias.
        While this linear strategy is useful for demonstrating whether mean rever-
        sion trading can be profitable for a given portfolio, it is not practical because
        we don't know beforehand what the maximum capital deployed will be, as
        there is no limit to the temporary deviation of the price from its average.

           For practical trading, we can use the Bollinger band, where we enter into
        a position only when the price deviates by more than entryZscore standard
        deviations from the mean. entryZscore is a free parameter to be optimized in
        a training set, and both standard deviation and mean are computed within
        a look-back period, whose length again can be a free parameter to be op-
        timized, or it can be set equal to the half-life of mean reversion. We can
        exit when the price mean-reverts to exitZscore standard deviations from the
        mean, where exitZscore < entryZscore. Note that if exitZscore = 0, this means
        we will exit when the price mean-reverts to the current mean. If exitZscore
        = -entryZscore, we will exit when the price moves beyond the opposite band
        so as to trigger a trading signal of the opposite sign. At any one time, we can
        have either zero or one unit (long or short) invested, so it is very easy to
        allocate capital to this strategy or to manage its risk. If we set the look-back
to a short period, and small entryZscore and exitZscore magnitude, we will get
a shorter holding period and more round trip trades and generally higher
profits.We illustrate the Bollinger band technique in Example 3.2 using the
pair GLD-USO we discussed above.

Example 3.2: Bollinger Band Mean
          Reversion Strategy

We traded GLD-USO in Example 3.1 using price spread USO-

hedgeRatio*GLD as the signal with a linear mean reversion strategy.

Here, we simply switch to a Bollinger band strategy, using the

entryZscore = 1 and exitZscore = 0, with the first part of the program

identical to PriceSpread.m.The present source code is in bollinger.m.

Notice that the entry signals longsEntry and shortsEntry are Tx1 logical

arrays, as are the exit signals longsExit and shortsExit.We initialize the

number of units of the unit portfolio on the long side, numUnitsLong,

a Tx1 array, and then set one of its values to 1 if we have a long entry

signal, and to 0 if we have a long exit signal; and vice versa for the

number of units on the short side. For those days that do not have

any entry or exit signals, we use the fillMissingData function to carry         71
forward the previous day's units. (fillMissingData starts with the
                                                                                IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES
second row of an array, and overwrites any cell's NaN value with the

corresponding cell's value in the previous row. It can be downloaded

from my website.) Once numUnitsLong and numUnitsShort are

computed, we can combine them to find the net number of units

denoted by numUnits.The rest of the program is the same as in

Example 3.1's PriceSpread.m.

% Bollinger band strategy
entryZscore=1;
exitZscore=0;

zScore=(yport-movingAvg(yport, lookback))./movingStd(yport, ...
  lookback);

longsEntry=zScore < -entryZscore; % a long position means we
   % should buy EWC

longsExit=zScore >= -exitZscore;

shortsEntry=zScore > entryZscore;
shortsExit=zScore <= exitZscore;

numUnitsLong=NaN(length(yport), 1);

                                     (Continued )
ALGORITHMIC TRADING                 Example 3.2 (Continued)

                      numUnitsShort=NaN(length(yport), 1);
                      numUnitsLong(1)=0;
                      numUnitsLong(longsEntry)=1;
                      numUnitsLong(longsExit)=0;
                      numUnitsLong =fillMissingData(numUnitsLong);
                      numUnitsShort(1)=0;
                      numUnitsShort(shortsEntry)=-1;
                      numUnitsShort(shortsExit)=0;
                      numUnitsShort =fillMissingData(numUnitsShort);
                      numUnits= numUnitsLong + numUnitsShort;

               The Bollinger band strategy has an APR = 17.8 percent, and Sharpe
           ratio of 0.96, quite an improvement from the linear mean reversal
           strategy!The cumulative returns curve is shown on Figure 3.3.

72

                           FIGURE 3.3 Cumulative Returns of Bollinger Band
                           Strategy on GLD-USO

        Does Scaling-in Work?

        The notion of scaling into a position with a mean-reverting strategy is famil-
        iar to many traders. (Another name for it is averaging-in.) As the price (of an
        asset, a spread, or a portfolio) deviates further and further from its mean,
