Example 3.1 (Continued)

regression_result=ols(log(y(t-lookback+1:t)), ...
   [log(x(t-lookback+1:t)) ones(lookback, 1)]);

and

    yport=sum([-hedgeRatio ones(size(hedgeRatio))].*log(y2), ...
       2); % The net market value of the portfolio is same as
       % the "spread"

   The APR of 9 percent and Sharpe ratio of 0.5 are actually
lower than the ones using the price spread strategy, and this is
before accounting for the extra transactions costs associated with
rebalancing the portfolio every day to maintain the capital allocation
to each ETF.

   Next, we will try using ratio as the signal. In this case, we will also
require the long and short side to have the same dollar capital.The
source code is in Ratio.m. It is interesting to look at a plot of the ratio
in Figure 3.2 first.

You can see that the ratio actually doesn't look very stationary at

all, compared with either the price spread or adaptive hedge ratio.          69

So it should not surprise us if we find the mean-reverting strategy to       IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES

perform poorly, with a negative APR.

FIGURE 3.2 Ratio = USO/GLD

                                                   (Continued )
ALGORITHMIC TRADING                 Example 3.1 (Continued)

                      lookback=20; % Lookback is set arbitrarily
                      ratio=y./x;
                      ratio(1:lookback)=[]; % Removed to have same test set as

                         % price spread and log price spread strategies
                      x(1:lookback)=[];
                      y(1:lookback)=[];

                      % Apply a simple linear mean reversion strategy to GLD-USO
                      numUnits=-(ratio-movingAvg(ratio, lookback))...

                         ./movingStd(ratio, lookback); positions=repmat(numUnits, ...
                         [1 2]).*[-ones(size(x, 1), 1) ones(size(x, 1), 1)];
                         pnl=sum(lag(positions, 1).*([x y]-lag([x y], 1)). ...
                         /lag([x y], 1), 2); ret=pnl./sum(abs(lag(positions, 1)), 2);

        Bollinger Bands

        The only mean-reversal strategy I have described so far is the linear strat-
        egy: simply scale the number of units invested in a stationary unit portfolio
70 to be proportional to the deviation of the market value (price) of the unit
        portfolio from a moving average. This simple strategy is chosen because it
        is virtually parameterless, and therefore least subject to data-snooping bias.
        While this linear strategy is useful for demonstrating whether mean rever-
        sion trading can be profitable for a given portfolio, it is not practical because
        we don't know beforehand what the maximum capital deployed will be, as
        there is no limit to the temporary deviation of the price from its average.

           For practical trading, we can use the Bollinger band, where we enter into
        a position only when the price deviates by more than entryZscore standard
        deviations from the mean. entryZscore is a free parameter to be optimized in
        a training set, and both standard deviation and mean are computed within
        a look-back period, whose length again can be a free parameter to be op-
        timized, or it can be set equal to the half-life of mean reversion. We can
        exit when the price mean-reverts to exitZscore standard deviations from the
        mean, where exitZscore < entryZscore. Note that if exitZscore = 0, this means
        we will exit when the price mean-reverts to the current mean. If exitZscore
        = -entryZscore, we will exit when the price moves beyond the opposite band
        so as to trigger a trading signal of the opposite sign. At any one time, we can
        have either zero or one unit (long or short) invested, so it is very easy to
        allocate capital to this strategy or to manage its risk. If we set the look-back
to a short period, and small entryZscore and exitZscore magnitude, we will get
a shorter holding period and more round trip trades and generally higher
profits.We illustrate the Bollinger band technique in Example 3.2 using the
pair GLD-USO we discussed above.

Example 3.2: Bollinger Band Mean
          Reversion Strategy

We traded GLD-USO in Example 3.1 using price spread USO-

hedgeRatio*GLD as the signal with a linear mean reversion strategy.

Here, we simply switch to a Bollinger band strategy, using the

entryZscore = 1 and exitZscore = 0, with the first part of the program

identical to PriceSpread.m.The present source code is in bollinger.m.

Notice that the entry signals longsEntry and shortsEntry are Tx1 logical

arrays, as are the exit signals longsExit and shortsExit.We initialize the

number of units of the unit portfolio on the long side, numUnitsLong,

a Tx1 array, and then set one of its values to 1 if we have a long entry

signal, and to 0 if we have a long exit signal; and vice versa for the

number of units on the short side. For those days that do not have

any entry or exit signals, we use the fillMissingData function to carry         71
forward the previous day's units. (fillMissingData starts with the
                                                                                IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES
second row of an array, and overwrites any cell's NaN value with the

corresponding cell's value in the previous row. It can be downloaded

from my website.) Once numUnitsLong and numUnitsShort are

computed, we can combine them to find the net number of units

denoted by numUnits.The rest of the program is the same as in

Example 3.1's PriceSpread.m.

% Bollinger band strategy
entryZscore=1;
exitZscore=0;

zScore=(yport-movingAvg(yport, lookback))./movingStd(yport, ...
  lookback);

longsEntry=zScore < -entryZscore; % a long position means we
   % should buy EWC

longsExit=zScore >= -exitZscore;

shortsEntry=zScore > entryZscore;
shortsExit=zScore <= exitZscore;

numUnitsLong=NaN(length(yport), 1);

                                     (Continued )
ALGORITHMIC TRADING                 Example 3.2 (Continued)

                      numUnitsShort=NaN(length(yport), 1);
                      numUnitsLong(1)=0;
                      numUnitsLong(longsEntry)=1;
                      numUnitsLong(longsExit)=0;
                      numUnitsLong =fillMissingData(numUnitsLong);
                      numUnitsShort(1)=0;
                      numUnitsShort(shortsEntry)=-1;
                      numUnitsShort(shortsExit)=0;
                      numUnitsShort =fillMissingData(numUnitsShort);
                      numUnits= numUnitsLong + numUnitsShort;

               The Bollinger band strategy has an APR = 17.8 percent, and Sharpe
           ratio of 0.96, quite an improvement from the linear mean reversal
           strategy!The cumulative returns curve is shown on Figure 3.3.

72

                           FIGURE 3.3 Cumulative Returns of Bollinger Band
                           Strategy on GLD-USO

        Does Scaling-in Work?

        The notion of scaling into a position with a mean-reverting strategy is famil-
        iar to many traders. (Another name for it is averaging-in.) As the price (of an
        asset, a spread, or a portfolio) deviates further and further from its mean,
the potential profit to be reaped from an eventual reversal is also increas-      IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES
ing; thus, it makes sense to increase the capital invested.This is exactly what
our linear mean-reversal strategy does. Note also that this type of scaling-in
strategies also scale out gradually: We do not have to wait until the price
reverts to its mean before taking profits.The advantage of being able to exit
whenever the price reverts by a small increment is that even if the price
series is not really stationary and therefore never really reverts to its mean,
we can still be profitable by constantly realizing small profits.An added ben-
efit is that if you are trading large sizes, scaling-in and -out will reduce the
market impact of the entry and exit trades. If we want to implement scaling-
in using Bollinger bands, we can just have multiple entries and exits: for
example, entryZscore = 1, 2, 3, ..., N and exitZscore = 0, 1, 2, ..., N - 1. Of
course, N is another parameter to be optimized using a training data set.

   All of these seemed very commonsensical until the research by Schoen-
berg and Corwin proved that entering or exiting at two or more Bollinger
bands is never optimal; that is, you can always find a single entry/exit level
that will generate a higher average return in a backtest (Schoenberg and
Corwin, 2010).They call this optimal single entry method "all-in."

   To illustrate their point, let's say a future contract has recently dropped to
a price L1, and you expect it to revert to a higher final price F > L1 (we have 73
to assume mean reversion to compare averaging-in versus all-in), though
there is a probability p that the price will go lower to L2 < L1 before re-
bounding to F. These possibilities are illustrated in Figure 3.4. We have just
enough buying power to invest in a total of two contracts, whether at prices
L1, L2, or F. Let's compare the three different methods of entry:

 I. All-in at L1:We invest all our capital when the price reaches L1, not car-
    ing whether it will go lower to L2.

                                 F
       1-p

L1         1

    p  L2

FIGURE 3.4 Two Possible Paths of Mean
Reversion. Path 1 (with probability p) has price
drops further from L1 to L2 before reverting to F.
Path 2 (with probability 1 - p) has price imme-
diately reverts to F. (Note that mean reversion is
guaranteed one way or the other in this example.)
                     II. All-in at L2: We wait until the price reaches L2 before investing all our
                         capital. (Therefore, we invest nothing and earn zero returns if the price
                         never reaches L2.)

                     III. Average-in:We invest in one contract when the price reaches L1, and in
                         another contract if the price reaches L2.

                     In all cases, we exit all contracts only when the price reaches F (so no aver-
                     age-out, even if there is average-in). What are the expected profits of each
                     alternative? The expected profits in points are:

                      I. 2(F - L1)
                     II. 2p(F - L2)
                     III. p[(F - L1) + (F - L2)] + (1 - p)(F - L1) = (F - L1) + p(F - L2)

                     Obviously, if p = 0, method I is the most profitable. If p = 1, method II is the

                     most profitable. In fact, there is a transition probability p^ = (F - L1) / (F - L2)
                     such that if p < p^, method I is more profitable than II, and vice versa if p > p^.

                     It is also easy to show that if p < p^, method I is also more profitable than III,

                     and if p > ^p, method II is more profitable than III. So there is no situation

                     where the average-in strategy is the most profitable one!

74                   So does that mean the whole idea of scaling-in/averaging-in has been

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  debunked? Not necessarily. Notice the implicit assumption made in my

                     illustration: the probability of deviating to L2 before reverting to F is
                     constant throughout time. In real life, we may or may not find this prob-

                     ability to be constant. In fact, volatility is usually not constant, which

                     means that p will not be constant either. In this circumstance, scaling-in

                     is likely to result in a better realized Sharpe ratio if not profits. Another

                     way to put it is that even though you will find that scaling-in is never op-

                     timal in-sample, you may well find that it outperforms the all-in method

                     out-of-sample.

                      Kalman Filter as Dynamic
                        Linear Regression

                     For a pair of truly cointegrating price series, determination of the hedge
                     ratio is quite easy: just take as much historical data as you can find, and use
                     ordinary least square (OLS) for a regression fit or use the Johansen test to
                     find the eigenvectors. But as we have emphasized before, stationarity and
                     cointegration are ideals that few real price series can achieve. So how best to
estimate the current hedge ratio for a pair of real price series when it can varyIMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES
with time? In all the mean-reverting strategies we have discussed so far, we
just took a moving look-back period and computed the regression coefficient
or Johansen eigenvector over data in that period only.This has the disadvan-
tage that if the look-back period is short, the deletion of the earliest bar and
the inclusion of the latest bar as time moves forward can have an abrupt and
artificial impact on the hedge ratio.We face the same problem if we use mov-
ing averages or moving standard deviations to calculate the current mean and
standard deviation of a price series. In all cases, we may be able to improve
the estimate by using a weighting scheme that gives more weight to the latest
data, and less weight to the earlier data, without an arbitrary cutoff point.The
familiar exponential moving average (EMA) is one such weighting scheme,
but it is not clear why an exponential decrease in weights is optimal either.
Here, we will describe a scheme of updating the hedge ratio using the Kal-
man filter that avoids the problem of picking a weighting scheme arbitrarily
(Montana,Triantafyllopoulos, andTsagaris, 2009).

   Kalman filter is an optimal linear algorithm that updates the expected
value of a hidden variable based on the latest value of an observable variable.
(For a good exposition of this topic, see Kleeman, 2007.) It is linear because
it assumes that the observable variable is a linear function of the hidden 75
variable with noise. It also assumes the hidden variable at time t is a linear
function of itself at time t - 1 with noise, and that the noises present in these
functions have Gaussian distributions (and hence can be specified with an
evolving covariance matrix, assuming their means to be zero.) Because of
all these linear relations, the expected value of the hidden variable at time
t is also a linear function of its expected value prior to the observation at
t, as well as a linear function of the value of the observed variable at t.The
Kalman filter is optimal in the sense that it is the best estimator available if
we assume that the noises are Gaussian, and it minimizes the mean square
error of the estimated variables.

   For every application of Kalman filtering, we need to first figure out what
these variables and matrices are:

 Observable variable (vector)

 Hidden variable (vector)

 State transition model (matrix)

 Observation model (matrix)
                     This is actually the only creative part of the application because once these
                     quantities are specified, the rest is just a robotic application of an existing
                     algorithm. As traders, we don't need to know how to derive the relation-
                     ships between these quantities--we only need to know where to find a good
                     software package that gives us the right answer.

                        In our application where the focus is to find the hedge ratio and the aver-
                     age mean and volatility of the spread, the observable variable is one of the price
                     series y, and the hidden variable is the hedge ratio .The linear function that
                     relates y and  is, of course,

                     y(t) = x(t) (t) + (t), ("Measurement equation") (3.5)
                     

                                                                        
                                           
        where x is the price series of the other asset, and is a Gaussian noise with
        variance V . As we typically allow the spread between x and y to have aALGORITHMIC TRADING
        nonzero mean, we will use a 2 × 1 vector  to denote both the intercept 
        and the slope of the linear relation between x and y, and we will augment
        x(t) with a column vector of ones to create an N × 2 array to allow for the
        constant offset between x and y. x actually serves as the observation model in
        the Kalman filter lingo.

           It may seem strange that we regard only y(t) as an observable but not x(t),
76 but this is just a mathematical trick, as every variable in the Kalman filter

        equations is observable except for the hidden variable and the noises, and so
        we have the freedom to designate which variable is the "observable" (y) and
        which one is the "observation model" (x). Next, we make a crucial assump-
        tion that the regression coefficient (our hidden variable) at time t is the same
        as that at time t - 1 plus noise

                     (t) = (t - 1) + (t - 1), ("State transition")        (3.6)

                     where  is also a Gaussian noise but with covariance V. In other words, the
                     state transition model here is just the identity matrix.

                        Given the specification of the four important quantities in italics, Kalman
                     filtering can now iteratively generate the expected value of the hidden variable
                      given an observation at t. One noteworthy benefit of using the Kalman filter
                     to find  is that not only do we obtain a dynamic hedge ratio between the two
                     assets, we also simultaneously obtain what we used to call "the moving average"
                     of the spread. This is because, as we mentioned,  includes both the slope and
                     the intercept between y and x.The best current estimate of the intercept is used
                     in place of the moving average of the spread. But, as your telemarketer often
                     reminds you, that's not all! As a by-product, it also generates an estimate of the
standard deviation of the forecast error of the observable variable, which we
can use in place of the moving standard deviation of a Bollinger band.

   Despite the linearity of Kalman filtering, the matrix relations relating
various quantities may seem quite complex, so I relegate them to Box 3.1
here for the patient reader to peruse.

   Actually, besides the iterative equations, we also need to specify the (co)
variances V and V of the measurement and state transition equations.These
specifications will be included in Box 3.1 as well.

BOX 3.1  The Iterative Equations of the Kalman Filter

         We denote the expected value of  at t given observation at t - 1 by ^ (t | t - 1),
         the expected value of  given observation at t by ^ (t | t), and the expected
         value of y(t) given the observation at t - 1 by y^ (t | t - 1). Given the quantities
         ^ (t - 1 | t - 1) and R(t - 1 | t - 1) at time t - 1, we can make the one-step

         predictions

           ^ (t | t - 1) = ^ (t - 1 | t - 1) ("State prediction")    (3.7)

         R(t | t - 1) = R(t - 1 | t - 1) + Vw ("State covariance prediction") (3.8)

           y^ (t) = x(t)^ (t | t - 1) ("Measurement prediction")     (3.9)

         Q(t) = x(t)´R(t | t - 1)x(t) + Ve ("Measurement variance prediction") (3.10)                                  77

         where R(t | t - 1) is cov((t) - ^ (t | t - 1)), measuring the covariance of the error of                      IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES
         the hidden variable estimates. (It is a covariance instead of a variance because
          has two independent components.) Similarly, R(t | t) is cov((t) - ^ (t | t)).
         Remembering that the hidden variable consists of both the mean of the
         spread as well as the hedge ratio, R is a 2 × 2 matrix. e(t) = y(t) - x(t)^ (t | t - 1)
         is the forecast error for y(t) given observation at t - 1, and Q(t) is var(e(t)),
         measuring the variance of the forecast error.

            After observing the measurement at time t, the famous Kalman filter state
         estimate update and covariance update equations are

           ^ (t | t) = ^ (t | t - 1) + K(t) * e(t) ("State update")  (3.11)

         R(t | t) = R(t | t - 1) - K(t) * x(t) * R(t | t - 1) ("State covariance update") (3.12)

         where K(t) is called the Kalman gain and is given by

           K(t) = R(t | t - 1) * x(t)/Q(t)                           (3.13)

            To start off these recursions, we assume ^ (1 | 0) = 0, R(0 | 0) = 0. But what
         about Vw and Ve? There is a method to estimate these variances from data
         called autocovariance least squares developed by Rajamani and Rawlings
         (2007, 2009). There is even a free Matlab/Octave package for implementing

                                                                                                         (Continued )
                     BOX 3.1 (Continued )  this method at http://jbrwww.che.wisc.edu/software/als. But for simplicity,

                                           we  will  follow  Montana  and  assume  v  =      I  ,  where    is  a  parameter
                                                                                         1-

                                           between 0 and 1, and I is a 2 × 2 identity matrix. If  = 0, this means (t) =

                                           (t - 1), which reduces the Kalman filter to ordinary least square regression
                                           with a fixed offset and slope. If  = 1, this means the estimated  will fluctuate
                                           wildly based on the latest observation. The optimal , just like the optimal

                                           lookback in a moving linear regression, can be obtained using training data.
                                           With the benefit of hindsight, we pick  = 0.0001. With the same hindsight,

                                           we also pick Ve = 0.001.

                        In Example 3.3, we describe the actual implementation of using the
                     Kalman filter to estimate a dynamic  for the EWA-EWC pair we discussed
                     in Example 2.7.

                                           Example 3.3: Kalman Filter Mean Reversion Strategy

                     We will now implement the Kalman filter equations 3.5 through 3.13

78                   and apply them to the EWA-EWC pair.The code can be downloaded

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  as KF_beta_EWA_EWC.m.We assume the price series of EWA is stored

                     in a Tx1 array x, and that of EWC is stored in a Tx1 array y.

                                           % Augment x with ones to accommodate possible offset in the
                                                  % regression

                                           % between y vs x.
                                           x=[x ones(size(x))];

                                           delta=0.0001; % delta=0 allows no change (like traditional
                                              % linear regression).

                                           yhat=NaN(size(y)); % measurement prediction
                                           e=NaN(size(y)); % measurement prediction error
                                           Q=NaN(size(y)); % measurement prediction error variance

                                           % For clarity, we denote R(t|t) by P(t).
                                           % initialize P and beta.
                                           P=zeros(2);
                                           beta=NaN(2, size(x, 1));
                                           Vw=delta/(1-delta)*diag(ones(2, 1));
                                           Ve=0.001;

                                           % Initialize beta(:, 1) to zero
                                           beta(:, 1)=0;
                     Example 3.3 (Continued)

for t=1:length(y)
        if (t > 1)
                beta(:, t)=beta(:, t-1); % state prediction.
                   % Equation 3.7
                R=P+Vw; % state covariance prediction. Equation 3.8
        end

        yhat(t)=x(t, :)*beta(:, t); % measurement prediction.
           % Equation 3.9

        Q(t)=x(t, :)*R*x(t, :)'+Ve; % measurement variance
           % prediction. Equation 3.10

     % Observe y(t)
     e(t)=y(t)-yhat(t); % measurement prediction error

     K=R*x(t, :)'/Q(t); % Kalman gain

     beta(:, t)=beta(:, t)+K*e(t); % State update.
        % Equation 3.11

     P=R-K*x(t, :)*R; % State covariance update. Euqation 3.12

End                                                                   79

   We can see from Figure 3.5 that with  = 0.0001, the Kalman-        IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES
updated slope (1, t) of a linear fit between EWC (y) and EWA (x)
oscillates around 1.

     FIGURE 3.5 Kalman Filter Estimate of the Slope     (Continued )
     between EWC (y) and EWA (x)
                     Example 3.3 (Continued)

                     FIGURE 3.6 Kalman Filter Estimate of the Intercept
                     between EWC (y) and EWA (x)

                     We can also see from Figure 3.6 that the Kalman-updated

                     intercept (2, t) increases monotonically with time.

80                   We can utilize these and other quantities computed from the

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  Kalman filter to create a mean-reverting strategy.The measurement

                     prediction error e(t) (previously called the forecast error for y(t)

                     given observation at t - 1) is none other than the deviation of the

                     spread EWC-EWA from its predicted mean value, and we will buy

                     this spread when the deviation is very negative, and vice versa if

                     it is very positive. How negative or positive? That depends on the

                     predicted standard deviation of e(t), which is none other than Q (t).

                     We can plot e(t) and Q (t) on the same chart (Figure 3.7) to see

                     that Q (t) changes quite slowly given our small .

                     The Matlab code for determining the entry and exit signals follows.

                     y2=[x(:, 1) y];

                     longsEntry=e < -sqrt(Q); % a long position means we should
                        % buy EWC

                     longsExit=e > -sqrt(Q);

                     shortsEntry=e > sqrt(Q);
                     shortsExit=e < sqrt(Q);
                        Example 3.3 (Continued)                                        IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES
   Once the entry and exit signals are determined, the rest of the
code is the same as bollinger.m--just substitute beta(1, :) in place of
hedgeRatio. It has a reasonable APR of 26.2 percent and a Sharpe ratio
of 2.4. Its cumulative returns are plotted on Figure 3.8.

                                                                                     81

            FIGURE 3.7 Measurement Prediction Error e(t) and
            Standard Deviation of e(t)

FIGURE 3.8 Cumulative Returns of Kalman Filter Strategy on

EWA-EWC                                                     (Continued )
                                             Example 3.3 (Continued)

                        Instead of coding the Kalman filter yourself as we demonstrated,
                     you can also use many free open-source MATLAB codes available.
                     One such package can be found at www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk
                     /Software/Kalman/kalman.html. Kalman filters are also available
                     from MATLAB's Control System Toolbox.

                      Kalman Filter as Market-Making Model

                     There is another noteworthy application of Kalman filter to a mean-
                     reverting strategy. In this application we are concerned with only one
                     mean-reverting price series; we are not concerned with finding the hedge
                     ratio between two cointegrating price series. However, as before, we still
                     want to find the mean price and the standard deviation of the price series
                     for our mean reversion trading. So the mean price m(t) is the hidden vari-
                     able here, and the price y(t) is the observable variable. The measurement
                     equation in this case is trivial:

82                   y(t) = m(t) + (t),                           ("Measurement equation") (3.14)

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  with the same state transition equation

                                 m(t) = m(t - 1) + (t - 1).       ("State transition") (3.15)
                     So the state update equation 3.11 is just

                     m(t | t) = m(t | t - 1) + K(t)( y(t) - m(t | t - 1)). ("State update") (3.16)

                     (This may be the time to review Box 3.1 if you skipped it on first reading.)
                     The variance of the forecast error is

                                          Q(t) = Var(m(t)) + Ve.                  (3.17)
                     The Kalman gain is

                                        K(t) = R(t | t - 1)/(R(t | t - 1) + Ve),  (3.18)
                     and the state variance update is                             (3.19)

                                          R(t | t) = (1 - K(t))R(t | t - 1).
Why are these equations worth highlighting? Because this is a favorite

model for market makers to update their estimate of the mean price of an

asset, as Euan Sinclair pointed out (Sinclair, 2010).To make these equations

more practical, practitioners make further assumptions about the measure-

ment error Ve, which, as you may recall, measures the uncertainty of the ob-
served transaction price. But how can there be uncertainty in the observed

transaction price? It turns out that we can interpret the uncertainty in such

a way that if the trade size is large (compared to some benchmark), then the

uncertainty is small, and vice versa. So Ve in this case becomes a function of t

as well. If we denote the trade size as T and the benchmark trade size as Tmax,

then Ve can have the form

Ve                       =  R(t  |  t  -  1)    T        (3.20)
                                                     -1
                                               Tmax
                                                       

   So you can see that if T = Tmax, there is no uncertainty in the observed
price, and the Kalman gain is 1, and hence the new estimate of the mean

price m(t) is exactly equal to the observed price! But what should Tmax be? It
can be some fraction of the total trading volume of the previous day, for ex-

ample, where the exact fraction is to be optimized with some training data.

   Note the similarity of this approach to the so-called volume-weighted
average price (VWAP) approach to determine the mean price, or fair value 83

of an asset. In the Kalman filter approach, not only are we giving more           IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES

weights to trades with larger trade sizes, we are also giving more weights to

more recent trade prices. So one might compare this to volume and time-

weighted average price.

 The Danger of Data Errors

Data errors have a particularly insidious effect on both backtesting and ex-
ecuting mean-reverting strategies.

   If there are errors, or "outliers," in the historical data used for back-
testing, then these errors usually inflate the backtest performance of
mean-reverting strategies. For example, if the actual trade prices of a
stock at 11:00, 11:01, and 11:02 were $100, $100, and $100, but the
historical data erroneously recorded them as $100, $110, $100, then
your mean-reverting strategy's backtest is likely to have shorted the
stock at 11:01 ($110), and then covered the position at 11:02 ($100)
and made a tidy but fictitious profit of $10.You can see that data quality
is particularly important for intraday data, because they present much
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGmore numerous opportunities for such errors.That's why reputable data
        vendors took great care in incorporating the exchange-provided cancel-
        and-correct codes to correct any trades that may have been canceled due
        to transaction prices that are too far from "normal." (What constitutes a
        "normal" price is solely determined, sometimes on a case-by-case basis,
        by the relevant exchange.) Thomas Falkenberry (2002) has written more
        on data cleansing issues.

           However, this type of data error will suppress the backtest performance
        of momentum strategies, so it is not as dangerous. In the preceding ex-
        ample, a momentum strategy will likely buy the stock at 11:01 ($110) in
        backtest, and may be stopped out at a loss at 11:02 ($100).

           The same kind of errors will, of course, trigger wrong trades in live trad-
        ing as well, often resulting in real-life losses. In the preceding example, if the
        prices were bid prices, and we have the erroneous bid at $110 at 11:02, then
        our execution program may have sent a short market sell order at that time,
        which unfortunately will be filled at $100 instead since there was actually
        no bid at $110.

           This problem with erroneous live bid/ask quotes is particularly dan-
        gerous when trading pairs or other arbitrage strategies, because in these
84 strategies we often depend on the differences of the price quotes from
        various instruments to trigger trading signals. The difference of a pair of
        quotes is usually of much smaller magnitude than the quotes themselves,
        so any error in the quotes results in a much bigger percentage error in the
        spread. For example, if we are trading a pair of stocks X and Y, and X has
        a true bid price of $100 andY has a true ask price of $105, so the spread
        Y-X is $5, which may be too small to trigger an market order to buy X
        and sell Y. But if data error causes Y to display an ask price of $106, then
        the erroneous spread becomes $6, an increase of 20 percent over the real
        spread of $5, and this may be enough to trigger an erroneous order to buy
        X and sellY.

           I have seen this problem in live trading when I used a broker's data feed
        to drive an equities pair-trading strategy.That data feed quite regularly trig-
        gered losing trades that I could not explain, until I switched the data feed
        to a third-party provider (nothing fancier thanYahoo! real-time quotes) and
        the bad trades stopped. Later on, I had access to Bloomberg's live data feed,
        and it didn't trigger any of these bad trades either.

           Bad ticks in live data will also cause momentum strategies to send
        wrong orders. So they are equally loss-inducing to the execution of those
        strategies.
KEY POINTS

· Do you want to construct a mean-reverting portfolio with a fixed number

of shares during the duration of a trade? Use price series to determine the
hedge ratios.

· Do you want to construct a mean-reverting portfolio with fixed market
   values for each constituent during the duration of a trade? Use log price

series to determine the hedge ratios.

· Ratio, instead of spreads, is often a good indicator for trading currency

pairs.

· Afraid that the hedge ratio, mean, and standard deviation of a spread may
   vary in the future? Use a moving look-back period or the Kalman filter.

· A practical implementation of a linear trading strategy is the Bollinger bands
   with scaling-in.

· Scaling-in may not be optimal in backtests but is often useful for live trading

where volatilities and probabilities do change.

· Do you want to dynamically update the expected price of an instrument

based on its latest trade (price and size)? Use the Kalman filter.

· Data errors can inflate the backtest results of mean-reverting strategies but

not momentum strategies.

· Strategies based on spreads are particularly sensitive to small data errors,     85

whether in backtest or live trading.

                                                                                   IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES
                                                        CHAPTER 4

Mean Reversion of
Stocks and ETFs

The stock market is, in a sense, the most fertile ground for finding mean-        87
     reverting instruments and for the application of those basic mean rever-
sion trading techniques described in the previous two chapters. In theory,

we can form pairs of stocks belonging to any sector and expect them to

cointegrate due to their exposure to many common economic factors.Their

number is large, so diversification is easy. In practice, though, there are some

serious difficulties with applying these generic techniques to trading stocks

and ETFs.This chapter will examine issues specific to stocks and ETFs. I will

also demonstrate that simple mean-reverting strategies actually work better

for ETF pairs and triplets.

But we need not limit ourselves to those strategies described in Chap-

ter 3 when looking for mean reversion in stocks or ETFs. We find that

in the short term, most stocks exhibit mean-reverting properties under

normal circumstances. (Normal circumstance means there isn't any news

on the stock, a topic that is taken up in Chapter 7.) This is despite the

fact that stock prices follow geometric random walks over the long term.

We will build a strategy to exploit this short-term, or "seasonal," mean

reversion.

Index arbitrage is another familiar mean reversion strategy. In this

case, we are counting on the cointegration of stocks versus futures or
                     stocks versus ETFs. Because little profit is left using the traditional

                     implementation of index arbitrage, we give an example of a modified

                     strategy.

                     As mentioned before, in addition to the familiar time series mean

                     reversion to which we have devoted all our attention so far, there is the

                     phenomenon of cross-sectional mean reversion, which is prevalent in

                     baskets of stocks. Recall that in time series mean reversion, the prices

                     are reverting to a mean determined by their own historical prices, while

                     cross-sectional mean reversion means that the cumulative returns of the

                     instruments in a basket will revert to the cumulative return of the bas-

                     ket. The statistical tests for time series mean reversion are largely irrel-

                     evant for cross-sectional mean reversion. This additional type of mean

                     reversion makes creating any sort of mean-reverting strategy for stocks

                     even easier.

                     Because of this ease of finding mean-reverting patterns, the stock market

                     attracts a large number of traders, often called statistical arbitrageurs, to ex-

                     ploit such patterns. As a result, the returns in such strategies have generally

                     decreased. We discuss a few simple tricks that can boost their otherwise

                     declining performances.

88                   Once again, we emphasize that the backtesting results in this book

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  do not include transaction costs. One reason for this omission is that

                     transaction costs can depend quite sensitively on the exact execution

                     method used and the exact stock universe chosen for the stock models.

                     A more specific pitfall included in the backtesting of the stock models

                     is the use of data with survivorship bias, since survivorship bias-free

                     data is more cumbersome and expensive to assemble. The hope is that

                     the results are not too unrealistic, at least for results in the past year

                     or two. If you intend to redo the backtests with survivorship bias­free

                     databases, you should remember that the chosen stock index (typically

                     Standard & Poor's [S&P] 500) has a changing composition throughout

                     its history, too. To do this properly, you would need a database contain-

                     ing the historical daily index compositions. Remember also the issue of

                     primary versus consolidated stock prices discussed in Chapter 1. The

                     historical prices used here are all consolidated opens and closes. But if

                     you implement some of these strategies using market-on-open (MOO)

                     or limit-on-open (LOO) orders, or similarly market-on-close (MOC)

                     or limit-on-close (LOC) orders, you will be filled at the primary ex-

                     change open or close. Usually, this means that the actual returns will be

                     lower than those reported here.
 The Difficulties of Trading Stock Pairs                                          MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

Pair trading of stocks is the first type of algorithmic mean reversion strategy
institutional traders invented, reportedly by Gerry Bamberger at Morgan
Stanley (Patterson, 2010). Yet nowadays it can be surprisingly difficult to
squeeze profits out of it.

   If we test the daily price series of individual stocks, they almost never
meet the definition of stationarity as defined in Chapter 2. The geometric
random walk describes their behaviors fairly well: once they walked away,
they seldom returned to their starting points. (Their intraday and seasonal
mean-reverting properties are special cases to be discussed later on.)

   Even if you pair them up in some sensible way (e.g., Exxon versus Chev-
ron, or Citibank versus Bank of America), they are seldom cointegrating out-of-
sample. I emphasize out-of-sample because it is quite easy to find cointegrating
stock pairs in any chosen period of time, but they can just as easily lose cointe-
gration in the subsequent out-of-sample period.The reason for this difficulty
is that the fortunes of one company can change very quickly depending on
management decisions and the competition.The fact that two companies are in
the same industry sector does not guarantee that they will be subjected to the
same fortune (think AAPL versus BBRY).The upshot is that it is difficult to be 89
consistently profitable in trading a single pair of stocks using a mean-reverting
strategy unless you have a fundamental understanding of each of the companies
and can exit a position in time before bad news on one of them becomes public.

   What if we trade a large number of pairs of stocks, so that occasional de-
railment of some pairs would not affect the profitability of the entire port-
folio? The law of large numbers will only work in our favor if the expected
return of an individual pair in the out-of-sample period is positive, but I have
not found this to be the case for stock pairs. Apparently, the small profits
gained by the "good" pairs have been completely overwhelmed by the large
losses of the pairs that have gone "bad."

   Other than these fundamental problems with stock pairs trading, there
are two additional technical difficulties.

   The first difficulty is short-sale constraint. It is particularly dangerous for
a stock pair that involves shorting a hard-to-borrow stock, because even if
your position is ultimately profitable, you may be forced to liquidate it at
the most unprofitable and inopportune time.This may happen when you are
short this stock and it suddenly jumps up in value due to some unexpected
good news, and many lenders of this stock are eager to sell them. In this
case, your borrowed stock may be recalled, and you will be forced to buy
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGto cover this position at a big loss, while selling the long position on the
        other leg.This is called the short squeeze.

           Under the same heading of short-sale constraint, the new alternative uptick
        rule in effect in the U.S. stock markets since 2010 also creates uncertainty in
        both backtesting and live executions of stock pairs strategy. Once the circuit
        breaker is triggered, we are essentially forbidden to send short market orders.

           The second difficulty arises in the intraday trading of stock pairs. Since the
        profit margins in stock pairs trading have been decreasing through the years,
        it becomes imperative to enter and exit positions intraday to capture the best
        prices. Also, if traders refrain from taking overnight positions in stock pairs,
        they may be able to avoid the changes in fundamental corporate valuations
        that plague longer-term positions mentioned above. However, intraday pair
        trading of stocks runs into the problem that the national best bid and offer
        (NBBO) quote sizes for stocks (and for ETFs) have become very small.This
        may be due to the prevalence of using dark pools or undisplayed "iceberg"
        orders by institutional traders, the breaking up of large orders into very small
        child orders by smart execution algorithms, the advent of high-frequency
        traders submitting small orders that they can cancel and replace frequently,
        and, finally, the reluctance of market makers to display large order sizes to
90 avoid being taken advantage of by high-frequency traders.

           For example, it is not unusual for AAPL to have an NBBO size of just
        100 shares!Therefore, backtesting a stock pair­trading strategy using either
        trade or quote prices is not very realistic unless you trade only 100 shares
        or if you include a substantial transaction cost.The same phenomenon leads
        to difficulties in live execution also. If we were to submit market orders for
        both sides after a trading signal was triggered by the NBBO prices, we could
        have suffered a substantial slippage. We are forced to send limit orders for
        one side (or for both sides with small fractions of an order and suffer tem-
        porary small unhedged positions) and actively manage the possible cancella-
        tions and resubmissions of this order in case they are not fully filled.

           Why was pair trading stocks so profitable in the past? One general reason
        is that the market was much more inefficient back then, so the normal profits
        from the pairs that do mean-revert are large enough to cover those losses from
        pairs that don't.This is, of course, a common plague for any profitable strate-
        gies, but it is particularly acute for such well-known strategies as pair trading
        of stocks. One specific reason for the decline in profits of stock pairs trading is
        the decimalization of U.S. stock prices. Decimalization caused bid-ask spreads
        to dramatically narrow, so pair traders, who act as a type of market makers,
        find that their market-making profits decrease also (Serge, 2008).
   Of course, the fact that pair trading of stocks is not very profitable in theMEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS
highly efficient U.S. markets does not mean that they are not profitable in
other countries. But for the U.S. market, we have the alternative of profit-
ably pair trading ETFs instead.

 Trading ETF Pairs (and Triplets)

The one advantage of trading ETF pairs instead of stock pairs is that, once
found to be cointegrating, ETF pairs are less likely to fall apart in out-
of-sample data. That is because the fundamental economics of a basket of
stocks changes much more slowly than that of a single company. For ex-
ample, since both Australia and Canada are commodity-based economies,
EWA and EWC (their respective stock index ETFs) are good candidates
for cointegration tests. And, indeed, we confirmed their cointegration in
Chapter 3. I mentioned this pair back in 2009 on my blog (http://epchan
.blogspot.com/2009/11/in-praise-of-etfs.html?showComment=125743
4002472#c1235760260813269054), and their cointegration continues as
of this writing (November 2012). The pair selection process for ETFs is
quite easy: we need to find ETFs that are exposed to common econom-
ic factors. Besides country ETFs, sector ETFs are another fertile ground 91
for finding cointegrated instruments. For example, the retail fund RTH
cointegrates with the consumer staples fund XLP.With the proliferation of
ETFs tracking more or less the same sector, pair-trading opportunities are
steadily increasing.

   Another favorite ETF pairing of mine is between a commodity ETF and
an ETF of companies that produce that commodity. The gold fund GLD
versus the gold miners fund GDX is a good example. The rationale is that
since the main asset of a gold-mining company is gold, their values should
cointegrate with gold spot prices. And, indeed, they have done so--until
July 14, 2008, or thereabout. If we test for cointegration of GLD versus
GDX between May 23, 2006, and July 14, 2008, using the Johansen test,
we find that they cointegrate with 99 percent probability, but if we test over
the period July 15, 2008, to April 9, 2012, they have lost the cointegration.
What happened on July 14, 2008? That's when oil (the West Texas Interme-
diate flavor) price peaked at around $145 per barrel, an all-time high.What
has oil price got to do with the cointegration between gold price and gold
miners' share prices? A lot, apparently. It turns out that when oil prices are
expensive, it costs a lot more to mine gold, and therefore the profits of gold
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGminers are reduced, leading to the underperformance of their share prices
        relative to gold spot prices ("The Wacky World of Gold," 2011).

           To gather empirical support for this explanation, we can introduce the
        oil fund USO into the portfolio and see if this triplet cointegrates over the
        entire period from 2006 to 2012. The Johansen test shows that they do,
        with a 99 percent probability that there exists one cointegrating relation-
        ship. Hence, instead of just trading GLD and GDX, we can trade this port-
        folio of triplets instead. Even if you find trading a triplet too cumbersome,
        you should at least have a rule in place to cease trading GLD versus GDX
        whenever oil price exceeds a certain threshold.

           This example has particular significance.When scientists first come upon
        an unexplained phenomenon, they form a hunch about its cause, and then
        they find ways to test this hunch empirically. We should adopt the same
        scientific process in approaching trading. When a trading strategy stops
        working, we should form a hypothesis of the reason, and then test empiri-
        cally whether that hypothesis is supported by data.The outcome of this pro-
        cess is often a modified strategy that regains profitability.

           One might think that the oil fund USO versus the energy sector fund
        XLE is another example of a commodity versus commodity producer pair,
92 but there is a problem with this pairing. While GLD owns gold, and thus
        reflects the gold spot price, USO doesn't actually own oil. It invests in oil
        futures contracts. As we will discuss in Chapter 5, futures price of a com-
        modity differs from its spot price. Even if XLE cointegrates with the spot
        price of oil, it may not necessarily cointegrate with USO. Of course, this
        problem plagues any commodity futures fund versus commodity producer
        fund. Mean reversion trading of such pairs would be much less risky if the
        commodity fund holds the actual commodity rather than the futures.

           The mechanics of trading ETF pairs is the same as trading stock pairs.The
        old uptick rule exempted ETFs, but the new alternative uptick rule covers
        all securities traded on U.S. stock exchanges. However, the NBBO sizes for
        ETFs are certainly much larger than that for stocks. For example, on a typi-
        cal day, the NBBO sizes for EWC can be around 5,000 shares.

        Intraday Mean Reversion: Buy-on-Gap Model

        Stock prices follow geometric random walks, as many financial scholars
        have tirelessly reminded us (Malkiel, 2008). But this is true only if we test
        their price series for mean reversion strictly at regular intervals (such as
using their daily closes). Our job as traders is to find special conditions, or
special periods, such that mean reversion occurs with regularity, while at
the same time avoiding data-snooping bias. As the following strategy will
show, there may indeed be seasonal mean reversion occurring at the intraday
time frame even for stocks.

   The rules for the strategy are:

1. Select all stocks near the market open whose returns from their
    previous day's lows to today's opens are lower than one standard
    deviation. The standard deviation is computed using the daily close-
    to-close returns of the last 90 days.These are the stocks that "gapped
    down."

2. Narrow down this list of stocks by requiring their open prices to be
    higher than the 20-day moving average of the closing prices.

3. Buy the 10 stocks within this list that have the lowest returns from their
    previous day's lows. If the list has fewer than 10 stocks, then buy the
    entire list.

4. Liquidate all positions at the market close.

The rationale for this strategy is that on days when the stock index futures

are down before the open, certain stocks suffer disproportionately due to        93
panic selling at the open. But once this panic selling is over, the stock will
                                                                                 MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS
gradually appreciate over the course of the day.

Rule 2 is often very useful in mean-reverting strategies: it is basically a

momentum filter superimposed on a mean-reverting strategy, a technique

that we will reprise often. Usually, those stocks that dropped "just a little"

have a better chance of reversal than those that dropped "a lot" because the

latter are often the ones that have negative news such as poor earnings an-

nouncements. Drops caused by negative news are less likely to revert. We

can actually develop momentum strategies based on such breaking news

(more on this in Chapter 7). Furthermore, the fact that a stock is higher

than a long-term moving average attracts selling pressure from larger play-

ers such as long-only funds, whose trading horizons tend to be longer.This

demand for liquidity at the open may exaggerate the downward pressure

on the price, but price moves due to liquidity demands are more likely to

revert when such demands vanish than price moves due to a shift in the

fundamental economics of the stock. Therefore, this strategy can succeed

in a news-heavy environment where traditional interday stock pairs trading

will likely fail.

The MATLAB code to backtest this strategy is displayed in Example 4.1.
                     Example 4.1: Buy-on-Gap Model on SPX Stocks

                     This code, which backtests the Buy-on-Gap model, can be
                     downloaded as bog.m. It requires as input three T × N arrays, op, lo,
                     and cl, where T is the number of days, N is the number of stocks in
                     the universe, and op contains the daily open prices, lo contains the
                     daily lows, and cl the daily closes.The stock universe we used to
                     backtest is the S&P 500, but one that has survivorship bias.

                         topN=10; % Max number of positions

                         entryZscore=1;

                         lookback=20; % for MA

                     stdretC2C90d=backshift(1, smartMovingStd(calculateReturns ...
                        (cl, 1), 90));

                     buyPrice=backshift(1, lo).*(1-entryZscore*stdretC2C90d);

                     retGap=op-backshift(1, lo))./backshift(1, lo);

                     pnl=zeros(length(tday), 1);

                     positionTable=zeros(size(cl));

94                   ma=backshift(1, smartMovingAvg(cl, lookback));

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  for t=2:size(cl, 1)

                                 hasData=find(isfinite(retGap(t, :)) & op(t, :) ...
                                    < buyPrice(t, :) & op(t, :) > ma(t, :));

                                 [foo idxSort]=sort(retGap(t, hasData), `ascend');
                                 positionTable(t, hasData(idxSort(1:min(topN, ...

                                    length(idxSort)))))=1;
                     end

                     retO2C=(cl-op)./op;
                     pnl=smartsum(positionTable.*(retO2C), 2);
                     ret=pnl/topN;
                     ret(isnan(ret))=0;

                        This strategy has an annual percentage rate (APR) of 8.7 percent and a
                     Sharpe ratio of 1.5 from May 11, 2006, to April 24, 2012. The cumulative
                     returns curve is depicted in Figure 4.1.

                        I have traded a version of it quite profitably in my personal ac-
                     count as well as in a fund that I comanaged. Unfortunately, that version
                FIGURE 4.1 Cumulative Returns of Buy-on-Gap Model              MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

does not include rule 2, and it suffered from diminishing returns from
2009 onward. The long-only nature of the strategy also presents some
risk management challenges. Finally, the number of stocks traded each day
is quite small, which means that the strategy does not have a large capacity.

   The astute reader may wonder how we can use open prices to determine 95
the trading signals for entry at the open and be filled at the official open
prices. The short answer is, of course: We can't! We can, however, use the
preopen prices (for example, at ARCA) to determine the trading signals.
The signals thus determined will not exactly match the ones determined
by the actual open prices, but the hope is that the difference will not be so
large as to wipe out the returns.We can call this difference signal noise.Also,
note the pitfall of backtesting this strategy using consolidated prices versus
primary exchange prices, as explained in Chapter 1.

   What about the mirror image of this strategy? Can we short stocks
that gap up a standard deviation but are still lower than their 20-day mov-
ing average? Yes, we can. The APR is 46 percent and the Sharpe ratio is
1.27 over the same period. Despite the seemingly higher return than the
long-only strategy, the short-only one does have steeper drawdown (see
Figure 4.2), and it suffered from the same short-sale constraint pitfall
discussed before.

   This strategy is actually quite well known among traders, and there are
many variations on the same theme. For example, you can obviously trade
both the long-only and short-only versions simultaneously. Or you can trade
a hedged version that is long stocks but short stock index futures.You can
ALGORITHMIC TRADING       FIGURE 4.2 Cumulative Returns of Short-on-Gap Model

        buy a larger number of stocks, but restricting the number of stocks within
        the same sector.You can extend the buying period beyond the market open.
        You can impose intraday profit caps. But the important message is: Price
96 series that do not exhibit mean reversion when sampled with daily bars can
        exhibit strong mean reversion during specific periods.This is seasonality at
        work at a short time scale.

        Arbitrage between an ETF and Its
           Component Stocks

        Many readers would be familiar with the strategy of "index arbitrage,"
        which trades on the difference in value between a portfolio of stocks
        constituting an index and the futures on that index. If the stocks are
        weighted in the same way used to construct the index, then the market
        value of the portfolio will cointegrate very tightly with the index fu-
        tures. Maybe too tightly--unfortunately, this is such a well-known strat-
        egy that the difference in market values has become extremely small
        (Reverre, 2001). All but the most sophisticated traders can profit from
        this strategy, and it most certainly needs to be traded intraday, perhaps
        at high frequency (see Box 4.1). In order to increase this difference, we
        can select only a subset of the stocks in the index to form the portfolio.
        The same concept can be applied to the arbitrage between a portfolio
          High-Frequency Index ArbitrageBOX 4.1

          High-frequency traders have been able to exploit two deficiencies in the        MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS
          intraday computations of the indices and arbitrage between the futures
          tracking these indices versus the component stocks. The first deficiency is
          that many major indices including Dow Jones, S&P, Nasdaq, and Russell
          are computed using only the primary exchange trades data (see Chapter 1
          on primary versus consolidated stock prices), which represent less than
          30 percent of all shares traded on those stocks (Arnuk and Saluzzi, 2012). The
          second deficiency is that the index is updated only once every few seconds.
          Both deficiencies lead to a discrepancy between the true, most up-to-date
          market value of a basket of component stocks and the index value itself. As a
          result, the index future value can be expected to lag the instantaneous market
          value of the stocks. If the index future value is higher than the instantaneous
          market value, we can simply short the future and vice versa. Where can we
          get this true, instantaneous market value of the stocks? We would, of course,
          need to subscribe to the direct data feed of every U.S. stock exchange and
          ECN (and not the SIAC feed) and monitor the trade prices for all the stocks
          in the index with millisecond latency in all these venues. Nobody said high-
          frequency trading is easy!

                                                                                        97
of stocks constituting an ETF and the ETF itself. In this case, we choose
just a proper subset of the constituent stocks to form the portfolio. One
selection method is to just pick all the stocks that cointegrate individu-
ally with the ETF. We will demonstrate the method by using the most
famous ETF of all: SPY.

   We will pick one year of data (in our example, January 1, 2007, to De-
cember 31, 2007) as a training set and look for all the stocks that cointe-
grate with SPY with at least 90 percent probability using the Johansen test.
Then we form a portfolio of these stocks with equal capital on each stock,
and confirm using the Johansen test again that this long-only portfolio still
cointegrates with SPY. This step is necessary because an arbitrary assign-
ment of equal capital weight to each stock does not necessarily produce a
portfolio price series that cointegrates with that of SPY, even if each of the
constituent stocks is cointegrating with SPY.We are using log price in this
second test because we expect to rebalance this portfolio every day so that
the capital on each stock is constant. (See the discussions in Chapter 3.)
After confirming cointegration, we can then backtest the linear mean re-
version strategy described in Chapter 2. The MATLAB source codes are
displayed in Example 4.2.
                     Example 4.2: Arbitrage between SPY and Its
                                    Component Stocks

                     This code can be downloaded as indexArb.m. It requires as input a TxN
                     array cl, where T is the number of days, N is the number of stocks in
                     the universe, and cl the daily closes.The stock universe we used to
                     backtest is the same as that used in Example 4.1, and the symbols it
                     contains are in a cell array stocks. All these arrays are packaged in a
                     structure stks. In addition, we need a Tx1 array cl for the daily closes
                     of SPY.These are packaged in a structure etf. Of course, we must
                     ensure that dates for stks and etf match.The common trading dates are
                     contained in a Tx1 array tday.We will run the Johansen test on only
                     the first part of this data: January 1, 2007, to December 31, 2007.
                     This is designated as the training set.

                         trainDataIdx=find(tday>=20070101 & tday<=20071231);

                         testDataIdx=find(tday > 20071231);

                     isCoint=false(size(stks.stocks));

                     for s=1:length(stks.stocks)

98                   % Combine the two time series into a matrix y2 for
                        % input into Johansen test

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  y2=[stks.cl(trainDataIdx, s), etf.cl(trainDataIdx)];

                     badData=any(isnan(y2), 2);

                     y2(badData, :)=[]; % remove any missing data

                                 if (size(y2, 1) > 250)
                                           results=johansen(y2, 0, 1); % johansen test
                                              % with non-zero offset but zero drift, and with
                                              % the lag k=1.
                                           if (results.lr1(1) > results.cvt(1, 1))
                                                   isCoint(s)=true;
                                           end

                                 end
                     end

                     length(find(isCoint))

                        Based on the Johansen test between each stock in SPX with SPY
                     over the training set, we find that there are 98 stocks that cointegrate
                     (each separately) with SPY. Now we can form a long-only portfolio
                     with all stocks that cointegrate with SPY, with equal capital allocation.
                     We must then test the cointegration of this portfolio with SPY.
              Example 4.2 (Continued)

yN=stks.cl(trainDataIdx, isCoint);
logMktVal_long=sum(log(yN), 2); % The net market value of

   the long-only portfolio is same as the "spread"

% Confirm that the portfolio cointegrates with SPY
ytest=[logMktVal_long, log(etf.cl(trainDataIdx))];
results=johansen(ytest, 0, 1); % johansen test with non-zero

   offset but zero drift, and with the lag k=1.
prt(results);

% Output:

% Johansen MLE estimates

% NULL:       Trace Statistic Crit 90%   Crit 95% Crit 99%
                                            15.494 19.935
% r <= 0 variable 1       15.869 13.429       3.841 6.635

% r <= 1 variable 2       6.197  2.705   Crit 95% Crit 99%
                                            14.264 18.520
%                                             3.841 6.635

% NULL:       Eigen Statistic Crit 90%

% r <= 0 variable 1       9.671 12.297

% r <= 1 variable 2       6.197  2.705

results.evec                                                                         99

%

% ans =                                                                              MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

%

%  1.0939            -0.2799

% -105.5600          56.0933

   The Johansen test indicates that the long-only portfolio does
cointegrate with SPY with better than 95 percent probability. So
we can form a long-short stationary portfolio comprising both the
stocks and SPY, using the Johansen eigenvector to determine the
weights of SPY versus that of the stock portfolio. (There are, in
fact, two cointegrating relations, but we will pick the one with the
largest eigenvalue--the first column of the eigenmatrix--to form
this stationary portfolio.) As the Johansen test was performed on
the log prices, the hedge ratios (represented by the weights array) on
the stocks or SPY represent dollar capital allocation, not number of
shares, as explained in Chapter 3. (The weight on each individual
stock is, of course, the same, due to our assumption of equal capital
allocation, but it differs from the weight on SPY.)

                                                                       (Continued )
                     Example 4.2 (Continued)

                        We then apply the linear mean reversion strategy on this portfolio
                     over the test period January 2, 2008, to April 9, 2012, much in the
                     same way as Example 2.8, except that in the current program we
                     have fixed the look-back used for calculating the moving average and
                     standard deviations of the portfolio market value to be 5, with the
                     benefit of hindsight.

                             % Apply linear mean-reversion model on test set

                         yNplus=[stks.cl(testDataIdx, isCoint), etf.cl(testDataIdx)]; ...
                            % Array of stock and ETF prices

                         weights=[repmat(results.evec(1, 1), size(stks.cl(testDataIdx,
                            isCoint))), ...

                                 repmat(results.evec(2, 1), size(etf.cl(testDataIdx)))]; ...
                                    % capital allocation among the stocks and SPY.

                     logMktVal=smartsum(weights.*log(yNplus), 2); % Log market
                        % value of long-short portfolio

100                  lookback=5;

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  numUnits=-(logMktVal-movingAvg(logMktVal, lookback)) ...
                        ./movingStd(logMktVal, lookback);
                        positions=repmat(numUnits, [1 size(weights, 2)]).*weights;
                        % positions is the dollar capital in each stock or SPY.

                     pnl=smartsum(lag(positions, 1).*(log(yNplus)- ...
                        lag(log(yNplus), 1)), 2);
                        ret=pnl./smartsum(abs(lag(positions, 1)), 2);
                        ret(isnan(ret))=0;

                        The APR of this strategy is 4.5 percent, and the Sharpe ratio is
                     1.3. As you can see from the cumulative returns chart (Figure 4.3),
                     the performance decreases as time goes on, partly because we have
                     not retrained the model periodically to select new constituent stocks
                     with new hedge ratios. In a more complete backtest, we can add this
                     dynamic updating of the hedge ratios.

                        The same methodology can, of course, be applied to any ETFs,
                     indices, or subindices you like. Furthermore, we can use a future instead
                     of an ETF if such a future exists that tracks that index or subindex,
                     although in this case one has to be careful that the prices of the future
                     used in backtest are contemporaneous with the closing prices for the
                     stocks. (This was pointed out as a potential pitfall in Chapter 1.)
                           Example 4.2 (Continued)                              MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

                     FIGURE 4.3 Cumulative Returns of Arbitrage
                     between SPY and Its Component Stocks

   You may wonder why we didn't just directly run a Johansen cointegration
test on all 500 stocks in SPX plus SPY, and let the algorithm automatically 101
find an eigenvector of cointegrating instruments that include the SPY. (Not
all cointegrating relations from the stocks+SPY universe necessarily include
SPY, but we need only pick one that does.) The problem with this approach
is twofold:
1. The Johansen test implementation that I know of can accept a maximum

    of 12 symbols only (LeSage, 1998).
 2. The eigenvectors will usually involve both long and short stock posi-

    tions.This means that we can't have a long-only portfolio of stocks that
    is hedged with a short SPY position or vice versa. This is a problem
    because if we have short positions in the stock portfolio and a short SPY
    position simultaneously, we would be double short on some stocks even
    when we are long the stock portfolio, increasing our specific risks.
   There is an alternative method of constructing a long-only portfolio of
stocks.We can still use Johansen test to individually test each stock in SPX for
cointegration with SPY. After this subset of stocks is found, we include them
in a stock portfolio and then use a constrained optimization method (e.g.,
genetic algorithm or simulated annealing) to minimize the average absolute
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGdifference between this stock portfolio price series and the SPY price series.
         The variables that we want to optimize in this case are the hedge ratios of
         the stocks, and the constraints are that all hedge ratios must be positive.The
         MATLAB Global Optimization Toolbox provides functions for either genetic
         algorithm or simulated annealing for this constrained optimization task.

            This strategy suffers from the same short-sale constraint that plagued any
         strategies involving short stock positions. However, the problem is not too
         serious here because the stock portfolio is quite diversified with about 98
         stocks. If a few stocks have to be removed due to the short-sale constraint,
         the impact should be limited.

         Cross-Sectional Mean Reversion: A Linear
           Long-Short Model

         In mean reversion trading based on cointegration, we form a portfolio with
         a fixed set of instruments and with either a fixed number of shares or a fixed
         dollar capital for each instrument.This fixed number may be determined by
         fiat (as in Example 4.2), linear regression, the Johansen test, or constrained
         optimization. But there is no reason why the portfolio has to consist of the
102 same fixed set of instruments or the same weightings over this set of in-
         struments every day. For many portfolio stock-trading strategies, the edge
         comes precisely from the intelligent daily selection or reweighting of stocks.

            In this type of so-called "cross-sectional" mean reversion strategy, the in-
         dividual stock (and this type of strategy most commonly involves stocks, not
         futures or currencies) price does not necessarily revert to its own historical
         mean. Rather, the focus is on their short-term relative returns, and we rely
         on the serial anti-correlation of these relative returns to generate profits. In
         most cases, the relative returns are computed as a stock's return minus the
         average returns of all the stocks in a particular universe. So we expect the
         underperformance of a stock to be followed by overperformance, and vice
         versa. Since we are measuring only relative return, it is quite possible that
         we will short a stock even though its previous (absolute) return is negative,
         as long as it is not as negative as the average return across all stocks in the
         universe.

            One interesting feature of cross-sectional strategies is that, in contrast to
         "time series" strategies, we should not expect profits from every individual
         stock, as some of them may serve as "hedges" on some days. Rather, profits
         can be obtained only in the aggregate across all the stocks.
   I described in my previous book just such a strategy proposed by Khan-
dani and Lo (Example 3.7 of Chan, 2009; original paper is Khandani and Lo,
2007).With this strategy, we invest in every stock from some favorite index
such as S&P 500, S&P 1500, or Russell 2000, but with different capital al-
location per stock. Near the market close of each day, we will determine the
long or short capital wi allocated to the ith stock as

 wi = -(ri - rj)/ k |rk - rj|                                (4.1)

where ri is the daily return of the ith stock, and rj is the average daily return
of all the stocks in the index. In other words, if a stock has a very positive
return relative to its peers, we will short lots of it, and if it has a very nega-
tive return relative to its peers, we will buy lots of it. Note that we always
invest the same total gross capital of $1 to the portfolio every day because of
the normalization factor in the denominator. The MATLAB code fragment
for this is displayed in Example 4.3.

Example 4.3: Linear Long-Short Model on Stocks

The implementation of Equation 4.1 in MATLAB is very compact.

We assume an input T × N array cl of daily closing prices,                           103

where as usual T is the number of trading days and N is the                          MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

number of stocks in the SPX.This code can be downloaded as

andrewlo_2007_2012.m.

ret=(cl-lag(cl, 1))./lag(cl, 1); % daily returns

marketRet=smartmean(ret, 2); % equal weighted market index
   % return

weights=-(ret-repmat(marketRet, [1 size(ret, 2)]));

weights=weights./repmat(smartsum(abs(weights), 2), ...
   [1 size(weights, 2)]);

    dailyret=smartsum(backshift(1, weights).*ret, 2); % Capital
       % is always one

   It has an APR of 13.7 percent and Sharpe ratio of 1.3 from January
2, 2007, to December 30, 2011, even if we backtest on the SPX.
(Usually, backtesting on a smaller cap universe will generate even
higher returns.) The cumulative returns are plotted in Figure 4.4.

                                                                       (Continued )
                     Example 4.3 (Continued)

                     FIGURE 4.4 Cumulative Returns of Linear Long-Short Model

                     The notable feature of this strategy is that it is completely linear,

                     has no parameters, and is almost perfectly dollar neutral.What

104                  strategy can be simpler than this? And remarkably, it achieved an APR
                     of 30 percent in 2008, the year of Lehman Brothers' bankruptcy, and
ALGORITHMIC TRADING
                     an APR of 11 percent in 2011, a year filled with high anxiety about

                     the U.S. federal debt rating downgrade and the Greek default. (Its

                     performance since the beginning of 2008 is a true out-of-sample test,

                     as the strategy was published in 2007.)

                        In my previous book, I also suggested that we may enhance the returns
                     of this strategy by using the return from the previous close to today's open
                     to determine the weights for entry at the open. All the positions will be
                     liquidated at the market close, thus turning it into an intraday strategy.The
                     modified MATLAB code fragment is displayed in Example 4.4.

                        There are possibly other variables (also called "factors") that are better at
                     predicting cross-sectional mean reversion of stock prices than the relative
                     returns that we have used in Examples 4.3 and 4.4. One popular variable
                     that traders use to rank stocks is the price-earnings (P/E) ratio, where the
                     earnings may be that of the last quarter, or they may be projected earnings
                     estimated by the analysts or the companies themselves.The reasoning is that
Example 4.4: Intraday Linear Long-Short
               Model on Stocks

In addition to the inputs required in Example 4.3, we need also the
T × N array op, which contains the daily open prices of the stocks.

    ret=(op-backshift(1, cl))./backshift(1, cl); % daily returns

    marketRet=smartmean(ret, 2); % equal weighted market index
       % return

    weights=-(ret-repmat(marketRet, [1 size(ret, 2)]));
    weights=weights./repmat(smartsum(abs(weights), 2), ...

       [1 size(weights, 2)]);
    dailyret=smartsum(weights.*(cl-op)./op, 2) ...

       ./smartsum(abs(weights), 2);

The APR and Sharpe ratio over the same period are 73 percent

and 4.7, respectively. Despite such seemly stellar performance, the

open-to-close version suffers from a few drawbacks that the close-to-

close version does not have.

First, the transaction costs (not included in our backtests) will

be doubled, because we are trading twice a day instead of just once

a day. Second, since this strategy also has to use "open" prices to            105

determine the trading signals for entry at the open, it is subject to the      MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

same trading signal noise that I mentioned in the Buy-on-Gap Model

in Example 4.1.

Actually, even for the close-to-close strategy, we also can't use

the exact closing price to determine the weights and then enter at

exactly those prices. But in that case, the prices just a few seconds

before the close are typically much closer to the actual official

(primary exchange) closing prices because these preclose prices are

printed when the primary market is open and has high liquidity.

stock prices will drift toward a new equilibrium value if there are earning
announcements or estimates changes. So a stock that experiences a posi-
tive change in earnings estimates will likely enjoy a positive return, and we
should not expect the price to mean-revert if this return is in line with the
percent change in its earnings estimates. We can therefore avoid shorting
such a stock if we use P/E ratio to rank the stocks.
                     KEY POINTS

                     · Are you tempted to trade pairs of stocks because of the enormous number
                        of choices? Beware of changes in companies' fundamentals that can

                     render out-of-sample performance quite poor despite stellar backtest
                     results.

                     · Trading a portfolio of cointegrating ETFs can be better than pair-trading
                        stocks.

                     · Are you pair trading ETFs that hold futures? Beware of the role of roll returns

                     in determining total returns of futures.

                     · Seasonal or intraday mean reversion is hard to detect with usual stationarity

                     or cointegration tests, but can be very profitable.

                     · Imposing momentum filter on mean-reversal strategies typically improves

                     their consistency.

                     · Do you think that index arbitrage between stocks and futures is no longer
                        profitable? Try selecting only a subset of the stocks in the index.

                     · Cross-sectional mean reversion strategies can be implemented very easily
                        with a linear long-short strategy.

                     · The variable used for ranking stocks in a cross-sectional mean reversion

                     strategy is typically relative return, but it can be other fundamental factors

106                  such as P/E ratio.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING
                                                        CHAPTER 5

Mean Reversion
of Currencies
and Futures

Conventional wisdom tells us that currencies and futures are the domain         107
     of momentum traders, and conventional wisdom is right about this.
Indeed, most CTAs (Commodities Trading Advisors) are momentum based.

It is also true that most currency or future pairs would not cointegrate, and

most portfolios of currencies or futures do not exhibit cross-sectional mean

reversion. So opportunities for mean reversion strategies in currencies and

futures are limited, but not nonexistent.This chapter will guide the reader

toward those situations where mean reversion is the exception rather than

the rule, such as the trading of futures calendar spreads. In particular, we

will discuss a trading strategy for one unique futures intermarket spread: the

volatility future versus the stock index future.

In the course of exploring mean reversion in futures, we will also discuss

a simple mathematical model of futures prices that will illuminate concepts

such as spot versus roll returns and backwardation versus contango. Un-

derstanding this model will also help suggest new futures trading strategies

without resorting to ad hoc technical indicators.

Trading currencies has certain nuances that are foreign to stock trad-

ers. Care must be taken when testing for cointegration of currencies or

when computing the returns of a portfolio of currencies by making sure

that a point move in one currency pair has the same dollar value as a
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGpoint move in another currency pair; otherwise, the results will not make
         sense. Furthermore, rollover interests might sometimes play an impor-
         tant role in determining total returns. These nuances will be covered in
         this chapter.

         Trading Currency Cross-Rates

         The basic idea in forming a stationary portfolio of foreign currencies is very
         similar to the trading of stock index ETF pairs from different countries:
         we need to find countries that have similar economic fundamentals. Since
         we found, for example, that EWA (Australian stock index ETF) and EWC
         (Canadian stock index ETF) cointegrate, we might expect to find AUD
         (Australian dollar) to cointegrate with CAD (Canadian dollar) as well. In
         addition, because both Australia and South Africa have major mining rev-
         enues, we might expect AUD to cointegrate with ZAR (South African rand).
         In fact, traders have called these and other currencies such as the Norwegian
         krone commodity currencies.

            Trading currency pairs has a number of advantages compared to trad-
         ing their corresponding stock index ETF pairs. Usually, liquidity in curren-
108 cies is higher (especially for best bid/ask sizes), thus lowering transaction
         costs.The leverage that can be employed for currencies is also much higher,
         though this can be a double-edged sword of course.There are no short-sale
         constraints for currencies. Finally, currency trading can be done around the
         clock, at least five days a week from 5:00 p.m. ET on Sunday to 5:00 p.m.
         ET on Friday. (ET can be either EDT or EST; i.e., it is either GMT-4 or
         GMT-5.) This means that we have a lot more trading opportunities in cur-
         rencies, and we can also employ stop losses in a meaningful way. (If a market
         is closed for a long period, stop losses are useless as the market can gap up
         or down when it reopens.)

            Despite the conceptual similarity with trading ETF pairs, the mechanics
         of currency trading is quite different. Let's start with some basic terminol-
         ogy. If we are trading the cross-rate AUD.ZAR, then AUD is called the base
         currency, and ZAR is the quote currency. (My personal mnemonic for this:
         B is ahead of Q alphabetically, so the order is B.Q.) If AUD.ZAR is quoted
         at 9.58, it takes 9.58 South African rand to buy 1 Australian dollar. Buying
         100,000 AUD.ZAR means buying 100,000 Australian dollars, while sell-
         ing the equivalent amount (100,000 × 9.58 = 958,000 at the preceding
         quote) of South African rand. However, few brokers actually offer AUD.
ZAR as a cross-rate. So usually we have to buy X units of B.ZAR and sell X        MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES
units of B.AUD to effectively buy X Australian dollar worth of AUD.ZAR,
where B is some other base currency.We usually choose a very liquid base
currency such as USD or EUR for this operation. We can denote such a
synthetic pair as USD.ZAR/USD.AUD, since the quote of AUD.ZAR will
be exactly equal to this ratio of quotes. When we actually trade this syn-
thetic pair live, the realized profit and loss (P&L) will be denominated in
both ZAR and AUD. In general, when we compute the returns of a strat-
egy trading B.Q, we are assuming that the profits are denominated in our
local currency (USD for U.S. investors), which may be neither B nor Q. So
in order for our actual realized P&L to conform to our backtest P&L, we
need to regularly convert B and Q into our local currency. For example, if
our local currency is USD, and we have realized profits of X units of AUD
and Y units of ZAR after a round trip trade, we need to buy X units of
ZAR.USD and Y units of ZAR.AUD. If we don't do this regularly, a large
accumulated P&L in AUD and ZAR may cause significant deviation from
our backtest results.

   Even when a cross-rate such as AUD.CAD is ready-made for trading, we
may sometimes find it advantageous to weigh the two currencies differently
by trading AUD.USD versus USD.CAD separately.The code in Example 5.1 109
illustrates such a strategy. In this strategy we use the Johansen test to find out
the best hedge ratio of capital, or capital weights, between AUD.USD versus
CAD.USD.Why not use the conventional quote USD.CAD instead of CAD.
USD? That's because in order to interpret the eigenvector from the Johan-
sen test as capital weights, the two price series must have the same quote
currency. Otherwise, the point moves of the two presumptive cointegrating
instruments would not have the same value, rendering the Johansen test
meaningless. Using CAD.USD in our backtest program doesn't make live
trading any more difficult:Whenever the program sends an order to "Buy 1
unit of CAD.USD," we should just "Sell 1/y of USD.CAD," provided y is the
current quote for USD.CAD.

   In Example 5.1, we focus on trading two currencies that can ultimate-
ly be reduced to a pair with a common quote currency USD: B1.USD -
B2.USD. So the returns of a portfolio with n1 units of B1.USD and n2 units
of B2.USD is

          n  y1,U (t)r1(t + 1) + n  y  ,  (t)r2(t + 1)  (5.1)
r(t + 1) =
             |n | y1,U (t) + |n2| y , (t)
                     as displayed in the last line of the MATLAB code in the example. Here ri is
                     the return of Bi.USD:

                            ri(t + 1) = ( yi,U(t + 1) - yi,U(t))/yi,U(t)                     (5.2)

                     where yi,U(t) and yi,U(t + 1) are the quotes for Bi.USD at t and t + 1 respec-
                     tively.This is because one unit of Bi.USD is worth yi,U in U.S. dollars.

                        However, if a portfolio has n1´ units of USD.Q1 and n2´ units of USD.Q2
                     instead, then the return can be written more simply as

                            r (t +1) = n1r1( ) 2 2 )                                         (5.3)
                            |n1|+|n2 |

                     where

                            ri(t + 1) = ( yU,i(t + 1) - yU,i(t))/yU,i(t)                     (5.4)

ALGORITHMIC TRADINGand yU, i(t) and yU, i(t + 1) are the quotes for USD.Q i at t and t + 1, respec-
         tively.This is because one unit of USD.Q i is worth exactly one U.S. dollar.

            Let me immediately say that Equations 5.2 and 5.4 are not strictly cor-
110 rect, as we have ignored the rollover interests, which we will discuss in the

         next section. But the impact of rollover interests is usually not large for
         short-term strategies like the one I describe in Example 5.1, so we have
         omitted them here for simplicity.

                                 Example 5.1: Pair Trading USD.AUD versus
                                 USD.CAD Using the Johansen Eigenvector

                     This is a classic linear mean-reverting strategy similar to the one in
                     Example 3.1 (PriceSpread.m). Previously, we used a look-back of 20
                     days to compute the hedge ratio, while here we use a fixed training
                     set of 250 days (which gives better results in hindsight), though
                     we are still using a look-back of 20 days for computing the moving
                     average and standard deviation. However, our current strategy
                     is very different from a typical forex strategy such as the one in
                     Example 2.5. Here, the hedge ratio between the two currencies is
                     not one, so we cannot trade it as one cross-rate AUD.CAD. Instead
                   Example 5.1 (Continued)

of running the Johansen test on USD.AUD versus USD.CAD, we
actually should run it on AUD.USD and CAD.USD, so that the dollar
value of a point move in each instrument is the same. Intuitively, this
also makes sense, since in a mean-reverting strategy we want to buy
CAD if CAD.USD is much lower than AUD.USD.

   We assume the input to be two T × 1 arrays usdcad and usdaud,
both daily price series.The T × 1 array yport is the market value of a
unit portfolio of AUD.USD and CAD.USD expressed in USD, while
numUnits is the number of units of this unit portfolio our strategy asks
us to own.The T × 2 array positions denote the market values in USD
of AUD.USD and CAD.USD that we should own. Naturally, the P&L
(in USD again) is just the sum of the market value of each instrument
times their returns, and the daily return of the portfolio is the P&L
divided by the total gross market value of the portfolio at the end of
the previous day.

The code can be downloaded as AUDCAD_unequal.m.

cad=1./usdcad.cl;                                                                 111
aud=audusd.cl;

y=[ aud cad ];                                                                    MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES
trainlen=250;
lookback=20;
hedgeRatio=NaN(size(y));
numUnits=NaN(size(y, 1), 1);
for t=trainlen+1:size(y, 1)

    res=johansen(log(y(t-trainlen:t-1, :)), 0, 1);
    hedgeRatio(t, :)=res.evec(:, 1)';
    yport=sum(y(t-lookback+1:t, :).* ...

       repmat(hedgeRatio(t, :), [lookback 1]), 2);
    ma=mean(yport);
    mstd=std(yport);
    zScore=(yport(end)-ma)/mstd;
    numUnits(t)=-(yport(end)-ma)/mstd;
end

positions=repmat(numUnits, [1 size(y, 2)]).*hedgeRatio.*y;
pnl=sum(lag(positions, 1).*(y-lag(y, 1))./lag(y, 1), 2);
ret=pnl./sum(abs(lag(positions, 1)), 2);

                                                                    (Continued )
                                             Example 5.1 (Continued)

                        Taking care to exclude the first 250 days of rolling training
                     data when computing the strategy performance, the APR is 11
                     percent and the Sharpe ratio is 1.6, for the period December 18,
                     2009, to April 26, 2012.The cumulative returns curve is plotted in
                     Figure 5.1.

112ALGORITHMIC TRADING

                           FIGURE 5.1 Cumulative Returns of USD.AUD versus
                           USD.CAD Strategy

                        You may sometimes find profitable opportunities trading two pairs of

                     entirely different cross-rates against each other: B1.Q1 versus B2.Q2. If the
                     strategy calls for a portfolio of n1 units of B1.Q1 and n2 units of B2.Q2, the
                     daily return (in the presumed local currency of USD) of the portfolio is

                     given by the same Equation 5.1.The ri there will be the return of Bi.Qi, so
                     Equation 5.2 is replaced by

                     ri(t + 1) = {log ( yi,Qi(t + 1)) - log( yi,Qi(t))}                  (5.5)

                     where yi,Qi(t) is the quote for Bi.Qi. The same equations, 5.1 through 5.5,
                     are valid if we had used EUR or any other currency instead of USD as the
                     local currency for computing returns.

                        As you can see, the key difficulty in backtesting currency arbitrage strat-
                     egies is not the complexity of the strategies, but the right way to prepare
the data series for cointegration tests, and the right formula to measure          MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES
returns!

 Rollover Interests in Currency Trading

A feature of trading currency cross-rate is the differential interest rate earned
or paid if the cross-rate position is held overnight. Note that "overnight" in
currency trading means holding a position untill or beyond 5:00 p.m. ET. If
we are long a pair B.Q overnight, the interest differential is iB - iQ, where iB
and iQ are the daily interest rates of currency B and Q, respectively. If iQ >
iB, then this interest differential, also called a rollover interest, is actually a
debit interest (i.e., your account will be debited). Actually, for reasons that
have to do with the T + 2 day settlement system, if a position was held past
the 5 p.m. ET close on day T, and day T + 3 is a weekend or holiday for either
currency of the cross-rate, the rollover interest accrued on that position will
be multiplied by one plus the number of days the market remains closed. So
if a position was held past 5 p.m. ET on Wednesday, the rollover interest is
three times the daily rate since the market is closed on Saturday and Sunday.
A further exception to this rule applies when we are trading USD.CAD or
USD.MXN, where the settlement occurs on day T + 1, so we only multiply 113
the rollover interest by one plus the number of nontrading days if day T + 2
is a weekend or holiday. (Thus, only if a position was held past 5:00 p.m. ET
on Thursday will the rollover interest be three times the daily rate.) All these
considerations impinge on the accuracy of a backtest of strategies that hold
overnight positions.

   When we calculate the Sharpe ratio for any strategy, we need to calculate
the excess return, because the Sharpe ratio is the ratio of the average excess
return divided by the standard deviation of the excess returns, suitably an-
nualized. The excess return is the return of the positions that the strategy
holds minus the financing cost of those positions. So if we have only intraday
positions, the financing cost is zero. If we are trading a long-short dollar
neutral equity portfolio, we can assume the financing cost is close to zero,
even though the credit interest is usually slightly less than the absolute value
of the debit interest. For futures positions, the financing cost is also zero,
because futures positions are just contracts, not assets that require cash to
finance. (We do not count the margin cash requirement, since that cash gen-
erates interest in the account.) In the case of currency cross-rates, we can
again set the financing cost to be zero, as long as we are careful to add the
                     rollover interest to the percent change of the cross-rate.That is, we need to
                     modify Equation 5.5 so that the excess return rt+1 from holding a cross-rate
                     position POSB.Q from day t to day t + 1 is

                     r(t + 1) = {log ( yB.Q(t + 1)) - log( yB.Q(t)) + log(1 + iB(t)) - log(1 + iQ(t))}

                                                                                                 (5.6)

                     where y(t) and y(t + 1) are the quotes for BQ at t and t + 1, respectively
                     (Dueker, 2006).

                        In Example 5.2, we see how we can take into account rollover interests in
                     backtesting the linear mean-reverting strategy on AUD.CAD.

                     Example 5.2: Pair Trading AUD.CAD
                             with Rollover Interests

                     We continue to use the linear mean-reverting strategy in this example,

                     but in contrast to Example 5.1 and in the interest of simplicity, we

114                  trade the ready-made pair AUD.CAD, not USD.CAD versus AUD.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  USD separately.We will take into account the overnight rollover

                     interest rates because this strategy holds beyond 5 p.m. ET.We assume

                     the daily closing prices of AUD.CAD are contained in a T × 1 array

                     dailyCl and the corresponding trading dates in the T × 1 array tday.

                     The historical interest rates are taken from the Reserve Bank of

                     Australia website's money market rate, www.rba.gov.au/statistics/

                     tables/#interest_rates, and the Bank of Canada web site's overnight

                     money market financing rates, www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/

                     uploads/2010/09/selected_historical_page33.pdf.The daily AUD

                     and CAD interest rates are assumed to be two T × 1 arrays aud_

                     dailyRates and cad_dailyRates respectively, matching the dates in tday.

                     The source code can be downloaded as AUDCAD_daily.m

                     lookback=20;

                     % Triple rollover interest on Wednesdays for AUD
                     isWednesday=weekday(datenum(num2str(tday), `yyyymmdd'))==4;
                     aud_dailyRates(isWednesday)=3*aud_dailyRates(isWednesday);

                     cad_dailyRates=zeros(size(tday));
                     % Triple rollover interest on Thursdays for CAD
