                        Example 5.2 (Continued)

    isThursday=weekday(datenum(num2str(tday), `yyyymmdd'))==5;
    cad_dailyRates(isThursday)=3*cad_dailyRates(isThursday);

    ma=movingAvg(dailyCl, lookback);
    z=(dailyCl-ma);

    ret=lag(-sign(z), 1).*(log(dailyCl)- ...
       lag(log(dailyCl)+log(1+aud_dailyRates)- ...
       log(1+cad_dailyRates), 1));

This simple mean reversion strategy yields an APR of 6.2 percent, with
a Sharpe ratio of 0.54, which are much weaker results than those in
Example 5.1, which, as you may recall, use a nonunity hedge ratio. It
is also worth noting that even if we had neglected to take into account
the rollover interest in this case, the APR would increase just slightly to
6.7 percent and the Sharpe ratio to 0.58, even though the annualized
average rollover interest would amount to almost 5 percent.

 Trading Futures Calendar Spread                                                    115

Futures contracts with different expiration dates (or "maturities") have dif-       MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES
ferent prices, and they have slightly different returns. Pairing up futures con-
tracts with different maturities creates what are known as calendar spreads.
Since both legs of a calendar spread track the price of the underlying asset,
one would think that calendar spreads potentially offer good opportunities
for mean reversion trading. But in reality they do not generally mean-revert.
To understand why, we need to understand more about what drives the re-
turns of futures in general.

Roll Returns, Backwardation, and Contango

The fact that futures contracts with different maturities have different
prices implies that a futures position will have nonzero return even if the
underlying spot price remains unchanged, since eventually all their prices
have to converge toward that constant spot price.This return is called the
roll return or roll yield.Despite its name, a futures position suffers this return
whether we actually "roll forward" to the next contract. It is an intrinsic
                              First nearby      Third nearby
                              contract expires  contract expires

                     log (P1)                                         t
                     log (P2)

                     log (P3)

                     FIGURE 5.2 Log Prices of Futures with
                     Different Maturities in Backwardation as a
                     Function of Time

                     part of its total return, which can be decomposed into a spot return and a

116                  roll return.
                        If the contracts are in backwardation, meaning the near (close to expir-
ALGORITHMIC TRADING
                     ing) contracts have higher prices than the far contracts, then the roll returns

                     will be positive; otherwise if the contracts are in contango, then the roll

                     returns will be negative.To see this, imagine that the spot price is unchanged

                     throughout time, represented by the horizontal line in Figure 5.2.

                     We can also pretend that the log futures prices with different maturities

                     conform to the same linear function of time with the same slope but with

                     different offsets, intersecting the spot price at expirations. The question is:

                     Should the slope be positive or negative? Graphically, if the nearer futures

                     have a higher price than the farther futures and have to intersect the hori-

                     zontal line earlier, they must be upward sloping and have positive roll re-

                     turn, as shown in Figure 5.2.At any given time, the price of the first nearby

                     contract P1 is higher than that of the second nearby contract P2, and so on.
                     The opposite is true if they are in contango, as illustrated in Figure 5.3. (We

                     display log prices instead of raw prices so that a contract with a constant

                     compounded total return will appear as a straight line.)

                     Note that this graphical argument merely serves as a mnemonic, not a

                     proof, as, of course, real log futures prices are not linear functions of time,

                     they may even intersect (two contracts of different maturities having the
         log (P3)

         log (P2)
         log (P1)

                   First nearby                          t
                   contract expires
                                     Third nearby
                                     contract expires

         FIGURE 5.3 Log Prices of Futures with Different
         Maturities in Contango as a Function of Time

same price) before they expire, and finally the spot price at expiration is               MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES
unlikely to be constant throughout time. Nevertheless, Figures 5.2 and 5.3
illustrate the typical situation. A mnemonic to help us remember whether
backwardation means near contracts have higher prices than far contracts is 117
presented in Box 5.1.

BOX 5.1  Mnemonic for Backwardation versus Contango

         I can never remember whether backwardation means near contracts have
         higher or lower price. If you are like me, you can employ the mnemonic below.

            This mnemonic originated with John Maynard Keynes (Hull, 1997). He and
         John Hicks argued that for normal commodities, those who actually own
         the physical commodities (the "hedgers," such as farmers or oil producers)
         tend to hedge their positions by shorting futures, expecting to lose money
         on their hedges. Meanwhile, the speculators are the ones who have a net
         long position, and need to be compensated for taking this risk. So they will
         buy only futures with positive roll return, or equivalently futures that have
         lower prices than the expected future spot price; that is, the ones in "normal
         backwardation." So we should remember that "backwardation" is always
         associated with "normal," and "normal" means the futures price is always
         lower than the spot price.

            Of course, this argument is not completely correct, since we will see that
         crude oil, a perfectly "normal" commodity, is in contango over various periods.
         But this story gives us a good mnemonic.
                        To calculate the spot and roll returns for a set of futures contracts, it is
                     helpful to have a simple model of futures prices. For many commodities, we
                     can write

                     F(t, T ) = S(t)exp((t - T ))  (5.7)

                     where t is the current time, T is the expiration time, and S(t) is the spot
                     price (Hull, 1997). This model implies that the (compounded) roll return
                      is constant over time. But we can take a step further, and assume that the
                     (compounded) spot return  is also constant:

                     S(t) = c et                   (5.8)

                     Essentially, we want to mathematically describe those lines in Figures 5.2
                     and 5.3, with the slight modification that they terminate not on a horizontal
                     line, but one that has a nonzero slope. So the model we adopt for the price
                     of a future that matures at time T is

                     F(t, T ) = c etexp((t - T ))  (5.9)

118 where c, , and  are constants.The total return of a contract is given by

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  (log F(t, T ))/t =  +         (5.10)

                     since T is fixed for a specific contract. Finally, the roll return of the futures
                     is given by

                     -(log F(t, T ))/T =           (5.11)

                     Hence, we have mathematically captured the notion that total return = spot
                     return + roll return.

                        Based on this model, we can use linear regression to estimate the spot and
                     roll returns of a futures series, as is demonstrated in Example 5.3.

                        Roll returns can be a curse on many seemingly attractive strategies
                     based on knowledge or intuition informed by the underlying spot price.
                     For example, an ETF of commodity producers (such as XLE) usually coin-
                     tegrates with the spot price of that commodity. But because of the presence
                     of roll return, this ETF may not cointegrate with the futures price of that
                     commodity. Not understanding this subtlety cost me more than $100,000
                     in trading loss, and ruined my first year (2006) as an independent trader.
Example 5.3: Estimating Spot and Roll Returns
       Using the Constant Returns Model

If we assume that spot and roll returns are truly constant throughout
time, as we did in Equation 5.9, we can use linear regression to
estimate their values. It is easy to find the spot return this way, as we
just need to regress the log of the spot prices against time. But to find
the roll return requires us to pick a fixed point in time, and regress
the prices of the various contracts against their time to maturity. In
practice, the regression coefficient will depend on that fixed time,
and also on the exact set of contracts available at that time. So despite
the assumption of constant roll returns, we will still end up with a
slowly varying estimated .

   We will apply this procedure to a few different futures in different
categories: the Brazilian Real future BR, the corn future C, theWTI
crude oil future CL, the copper future HG, and the two-year U.S.
Treasury Note future TU.

In the following program, we assume that the spot price is
contained in an  × 1 array spot, and the futures closing price data
are stored in a  × M array cl, where  is the number of trading days,                 119

and M is the number of contracts. Certainly not all contracts exist                  MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

at all times, so we will denote the prices for those days when some

contracts are nonexistent as NaN.

   We will first find the average annualized (compounded) spot
return with a simple regression below. (The program can be
downloaded as estimateFuturesReturns.m.)

T=[1:length(spot)]';

T(isBadData)=[];

res=ols(log(spot), [T ones(size(T, 1), 1)]);

    fprintf(1, `Average annualized spot return=%f\n', ...
       252*smartmean(res.beta(1)));

   Next, we will fit the forward curve (the future price as a function
of maturity date) in order to obtain the values for the roll return ;
that is, we will pick one day at a time and fit the prices of futures
of five nearest maturities to their time-to-maturity T (measured
in months), as long as there are five consecutive contracts for the
fitting. (The forward curve might well change from contango to

                                                                       (Continued )
                     Example 5.3 (Continued)

                     backwardation or vice versa beyond the nearest five contracts.) We
                     store the values of  in a  × 1 array gamma.

                         Gamma=NaN(size(tday));
                         for t=1:length(tday)

                             FT=cl(t, :)';
                             idx=find(isfinite(FT));
                             idxDiff=fwdshift(1, idx)-idx; % ensure consecutive months

                                % futures
                             if (length(idx) >= 5 && all(idxDiff(1:4)==1))

                                 FT=FT(idx(1:5));
                                 T=[1:length(FT)]';

                             res=ols(log(FT), [T ones(size(T, 1), 1)]);
                             gamma(t)=-12*res.beta(1);
                         end
                     end

                     To verify that Equation 5.7 is sensible, we scatter-plot the log futures

120                  values of CL against the time to maturity at one fixed point in time in

                     Figure 5.4 and check that they do fall on a straight line quite neatly.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  (We restrict ourselves to only five nearest contracts in this scatter plot.

                     Prices of contracts farther out in maturities may not fall onto the same

                     straight line so neatly, indicating a breakdown in Equation 5.7)

                     FIGURE 5.4 Scatter Plot of Log Futures Values against
                     Time-to-Maturity for CL 2007 January to May Contracts.
                     The log prices fall neatly on a straight line.
                        Example 5.3 (Continued)

   The annualized values for  over the period November 22, 2004,
to August 13, 2012, for CL are plotted in Figure 5.5.

                                                                          121

FIGURE 5.5 Values of the Roll Return  for CL. Positive values indicate    MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES
backwardation and negative values indicate contango.

I listed the average annualized values for the spot returns  and the
roll returns  for the five futures in Table 5.1.You can see that for BR,
C, and TU, the magnitude of the roll returns is much larger than that
of the spot returns!

TABLE 5.1 Annualized Average Spot and Roll Returns forVarious Futures

Symbol             

BR (CME)    ­2.7%   10.8%
C (CBOT)     2.8%  ­12.8%
CL (NYMEX)   7.3%   ­7.1%
HG (CME)     5.0%
TU (CBOT)   ­0.0%    7.7%
                     3.2%
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGAnother example: Every student of finance knows that volatility is mean
         reverting; more precisely, we know that the VIX index is mean reverting.
         In fact, an augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test will show that it is sta-
         tionary with 99 percent certainty.You might think, then, that trading VX
         futures would be a great mean-reverting strategy. (VX is the future that
         tracks the VIX volatility index trading on the CBOE's Futures Exchange
         [CFE].) However, a look at the back-adjusted front-month futures prices
         over time indicates that the mean reversion inVX only happens after vola-
         tility peaked around November 20, 2008 (the credit crisis), May 20, 2010
         (aftermath of flash crash), and then again on October 3, 2011. At other
         times, it just inexorably declines. Indeed, the ADF test shows that the
         back-adjusted front contract prices definitively do not mean-revert. You
         can see the difference betweenVIX and the front-monthVX in Figure 5.6,
         a difference that is entirely due to roll return. The VX future has been in
         contango around three fourths of the time, and the average roll return is a
         very negative annualized ­50 percent (Simon and Campasano, 2012).This
         persistent contango is why we find in Chapter 6 that a momentum strategy
         works pretty well with VX.

            Average roll returns can be quite large compared to their average spot
122 returns for other futures besides VX as well. Table 5.1 shows that the an-

         nualized roll return for corn is ­12.8 percent compared to a spot return
         of 2.8 percent, and Erb and Harvey calculated that the annualized roll
         return for heating oil is 4.6 percent, compared to a spot return of 0.93
         percent, over the period December 1982 to May 2004 (Erb and Harvey,
         2006).

                           FIGURE 5.6 VIX Index versus Back-Adjusted VX Front
                           Contract Prices
Do Calendar Spreads Mean-Revert?                                                      MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

A calendar spread is a portfolio that consists of a long position in one futures
contract, and a short position in another futures contract with the same un-
derlying but a different expiration month. Based on our previous experience
with spreads in general, calendar spreads would seem to be great candidates
for mean reversion: Aren't both legs tracking the exact same underlying as-
set? But here again, roll returns derail our intuition.The futures price model
expressed in Equation 5.7 will make this clear.

   As with any spread trading, we can choose to define the spread as the
differences of log prices of the two legs in order to generate trading signals
(see Chapter 3), assuming that we maintain the market value of the two legs
to be the same at every period. The log market value of a spread portfolio
with a long far contract and a short near contract is simply (T1 - T2) with
T2 > T1, according to Equation 5.7. (Again, this simple formula may not
hold if T2 - T1 is large.)The important point is that the calendar spread trad-
ing signal does not depend at all on the spot price, only on the roll return!

   As we learned in Chapter 2, return series (as opposed to price series)
almost always mean-revert. Here we are considering not the total return
of a future, but the roll return component only, so things may be different.
(Though the model expressed in Equation 5.7 presupposes that the spot 123
and roll returns are both constant, we may nevertheless attempt to apply it
to situations where the roll return varies slowly.) We run the ADF test for
12-month log calendar spread of CL, and discovered that it is indeed station-
ary with 99 percent probability, and a half-life of 36 days. Furthermore, if
we apply our usual linear mean-reverting strategy to the log calendar spread
for CL, we do get an APR of 8.3 percent and a Sharpe ratio of 1.3 from
January 2, 2008, to August 13, 2012. The details of the backtest are de-
scribed in Example 5.4.

                Example 5.4: Mean Reversion Trading of
                               Calendar Spreads

   As we discussed in the main text, the log market value of a
   calendar spread portfolio with a long far contract and a short near
   contract is simply (T1 - T2), with T2 > T1. Since T1 and T2 are
   fixed for a particular calendar spread, we can use the (hopefully)
   mean- reverting  to generate trading signals. In the program

                                                                          (Continued )
                     Example 5.4 (Continued)

                     calendarSpdsMeanReversion.m below, we assume that the price of the
                     CL contracts is stored in a  × M array cl, where  is the number
                     of trading days, and M is the number of contracts.We compute  in
                     the same way as in Example 5.3, and store the resulting values  in a
                      × 1 array gamma. As a first step, we find the half-life of .

                     isGoodData=find(isfinite(gamma));
                     gammalag=lag(gamma(isGoodData), 1);
                     deltaGamma=gamma(isGoodData)-gammalag;
                     deltaGamma(1)=[];
                     gammalag(1)=[];
                     regress_results=ols(deltaGamma, [gammalag ...

                        ones(size(gammalag))]);
                     halflife=-log(2)/regress_results.beta(1);

                        The half-life is found to be about 36 days.To apply our linear mean
                     reversion strategy, we need to compute the Z-Score, with the look-
                     back set equal to the half-life, as demonstrated in Example 2.5.

124                  lookback=round(halflife);
                     ma=movingAvg(gamma, lookback);
ALGORITHMIC TRADING  mstd=movingStd(gamma, lookback);
                     zScore=(gamma-ma)./mstd;

                        Here comes the most difficult part.We need to pick a pair of
                     contracts, far and near, on each historical day, based on three criteria:

                     1. The holding period for a pair of contracts is 3 months (61 trading
                         days).

                      2. We roll forward to the next pair of contracts 10 days before the
                         current near contract's expiration.

                      3. The expiration dates of the near and far contracts are 1 year apart.

                        Once we have picked those contracts, we assume initially that we
                     will hold a long position in the far contract, and a short position in
                     the near one, subject to revisions later.

                     isExpireDate=false(size(cl));
                     positions=zeros(size(cl));
Example 5.4 (Continued)

isExpireDate=isfinite(cl) & ~isfinite(fwdshift(1, cl));                125
holddays=3*21;
numDaysStart=holddays+10;                                              MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES
numDaysEnd=10;
spreadMonth=12; % No. months between far and near contracts.
for c=1:length(contracts)-spreadMonth

    expireIdx=find(isExpireDate(:, c));
    expireIdx=expireIdx(end); % There may be some missing

       % data earlier on
    if (c==1)

        startIdx=max(1, expireIdx-numDaysStart);
        endIdx=expireIdx-numDaysEnd;
    else % ensure next front month contract doesn't start
       until current one ends
        myStartIdx=endIdx+1;
        myEndIdx=expireIdx-numDaysEnd;
        if (myEndIdx-myStartIdx >= holddays)

            startIdx=myStartIdx;
            endIdx=myEndIdx;
        else
            startIdx=NaN;
        end
end

if (~isempty(expireIdx) & endIdx > startIdx)
        positions(startIdx:endIdx, c)=-1;
        positions(startIdx:endIdx, c+spreadMonth)=1;

    end
end

   Finally, we apply the linear mean reversion strategy to determine
the true positions and calculate the unlevered daily returns of the
portfolio. (The daily return is the daily P&L divided by 2 because we
have two contracts.)

positions(isnan(zScore), :)=0;

positions(zScore > 0, :)=-positions(zScore > 0, :);

ret=smartsum(lag(positions).*(cl-lag(cl, 1))./lag(cl, 1), ...
   2)/2;

ret(isnan(ret))=0;

                                                      (Continued )
ALGORITHMIC TRADING                 Example 5.4 (Continued)
               This results in an attractive unlevered APR of 8.3 percent and a
            Sharpe ratio of 1.3 from January 2, 2008, to August 13, 2012.The
            cumulative returns curve is shown in Figure 5.7.

126

               FIGURE 5.7 Cumulative Returns of the Linear Mean Reversion Strategy
               Applied on CL 12-Month Calendar Spread

            Students of commodities markets know that seasonality is often a promi-
         nent feature. So you may find that for a particular market, only calendar
         spreads of certain months (and certain months apart) mean-revert. How-
         ever, we won't pursue these market-dependent details here.

            We can try this same linear mean reversion strategy on the VX calendar
         spreads. It turns out that Equation 5.7 works only for a future whose un-
         derlying is a traded asset, and VIX is not one. (If you scatter-plot the log VX
         futures prices as a function of time-to-maturity as we did in Figure 5.4 for
         CL, you will find that they do not fall on a straight line.) Various research-
         ers have suggested alternative formulae suitable for the VX future (see, for
         example, Dupoyet, Daigler, and Chen, 2011), but I have found that none
         can explain the mean-reverting property of VX calendar spreads in the face
                FIGURE 5.8 Cumulative Returns of Linear Mean                    MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES
                Reversion Strategy on VX Calendar Spread

of the non-mean reversion of the VX future itself. So we can rely on only
our empirical observation that an ADF test on the ratio back/front ofVX also
shows that it is stationary with a 99 percent probability. If we apply our usual
linear mean-reverting strategy using ratio as the signal (and with a 15-day
look-back for the moving average and standard deviations), VX yields an 127
APR of 17.7 percent and a Sharpe ratio of 1.5 from October 27, 2008, to
April 23, 2012 (see Figure 5.8 for a plot of its cumulative returns), though
it performed much more poorly prior to October 2008. In the next section,
I will present graphic evidence that there is a regime change in the behavior
ofVIX and its futures around the time of the financial crisis of 2008, so per-
haps this abrupt change in the strategy performance is related to that as well.

 Futures Intermarket Spreads

As I stated in the introduction of this chapter, it is not easy to find futures
intermarket spreads (i.e., pairs of futures from different underlyings) that
are mean reverting. Nevertheless, let's systematically round up some of the
usual suspects.

   The most obvious candidate for pair trading futures is intermarket spreads
between markets that are closely related. For example, the energy com-
plexes (WTI crude oil CL, Brent crude oil BZ, unleaded gasoline RB, and
heating oil HO, all traded on the NewYork Mercantile Exchange [NYMEX])
should offer rich potential opportunities.
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGBefore we run a Johansen test on these four contracts, we can first ex-
         amine a well-known portfolio called the crack spread consisting of long three
         contracts of CL, short two contracts of RB, and short one contract of HO.
         This is called the crack spread because we can obtain gasoline and heating
         oil by cracking the long hydrocarbon chains of crude oil molecules, and
         the 3:2:1 hedge ratios come about because three barrels of CL produces
         approximately two barrels of RB and one barrel of heating oil, though this
         is not universally true for all refiners. One advantage of trading the crack
         spread is that NYMEX offers a ready-made basket for it, with a much lower
         margin requirement than if we trade them separately.

            However, running an ADF test on the crack spread from May 20, 2002,
         to May 4, 2012, shows that this spread is not mean reverting. The chart of
         this spread (Figure 5.9) reveals a dramatic increase in value around March 9,
         2007, to July 3, 2008, and then a sharp drop after that, and running the
         linear mean reversion strategy on it shows negative returns for that period.
         (Note that we must back-adjust the continuous contracts using prices rather
         than returns in this test; otherwise, this price spread will show a discontinu-
         ous jump at rollovers, as explained in Chapter 1.)

            Another spread that would seem to be a good candidate is CL and BZ in a
128 1:1 ratio. After all, their underlyings are both crude oils. But another quick

         ADF test will show that it is far from stationary. BZ has relentlessly outper-
         formed CL due to a variety of factors. The likely culprits include the in-
         creasing oil production in the United States (Friedman, 2012), the pipeline
         bottleneck at Cushing, Oklahoma (Philips, 2012), and geopolitical concerns

                            FIGURE 5.9 The Crack Spread
such as the embargo against Iranian oil in 2012, which affected Europe and
therefore BZ more than the United States.

   If you want to backtest intermarket spreads yourself, don't forget to
make sure that their prices are synchronous, as I cautioned in Chapter 1. In
particular, before BZ started trading at the NYMEX on September 5, 2001,
it was traded at the Intercontinental Petroleum Exchange in London, which
obviously has a different closing time than NYMEX on which CL has always
been traded. So backtesting the BZ-CL spread before September 5, 2001,
using closing prices would be wrong. Also, we often need to multiply the
futures prices by a factor to convert points into USD.

   Our search for mean-reverting intermarket futures spreads has not been
fruitful so far. But I will now discuss one unusual spread that will change that.

Volatility Futures versus Equity Index Futures

Many traders have observed that volatility is anti-correlated with the stock

equity market index:When the market goes down, volatility shoots up, and

to a lesser extent, vice versa. One way to visualize this inverse relationship is

to plot ES, the E-mini S&P 500 futures front-month prices, against VX, the

VIX futures front-month prices. This can be accomplished by the "scatter"          129

function in MATLAB, and the result is displayed in Figure 5.10.

The first obvious feature of this plot is that, indeed, the stock index has an     MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

inverse relationship with volatility. But, more interestingly, there appeared to

be two main regimes, 2004 to May 2008 and August 2008 to 2012.The sec-

ond regime has a notably lower volatility for a given stock index level. In plain

FIGURE 5.10 A Study of Volatility Regimes: ES versus VX
                     English, the market is less volatile nowadays. However, the range of volatili-
                     ties is greater now, meaning that we have days with more extreme volatilities
                     than before. (There are other, shorter periods that may represent transitional
                     states, but we will ignore them in our analysis.) It would be a mistake to run
                     a linear regression or apply the Johansen test to a mixture of both regimes, so
                     we focus on the second one, which extends to the time of this writing.

                        We choose to compute the regression coefficients only for the first 500
                     days of the post­August 2008 data as the training set because later we would
                     like to use the various statistics from this regression to build our trading
                     model. Before we actually run the prices through the linear regression pro-
                     gram, we have to remember that the futures prices of VX and ES are in dif-
                     ferent units: one point move in VX is $1,000, while one point move in ES is
                     $50. So we need to multiply the prices of VX by 1,000 and the prices of ES
                     by 50 in order for the hedge ratio to properly reflect the ratio in the number
                     of contracts.

                        The linear relationship is shown in Equation 5.11.

                     ES × 50 = -0.3906 × VX × 1,000 + $77,150       (5.11)

         where ES and VX are their respective futures (settlement) prices. The stan-ALGORITHMIC TRADING
130 dard deviation of the residues is $2,047. This means that a portfolio that is

         long 0.3906 contracts ofVX and long one contract of ES should be stationary,
         as a plot (Figure 5.11) of this portfolio's market value would convince us.

            We can construct a Bollinger band­like mean-reverting strategy by short-
         ing this portfolio whenever its value deviates from one standard deviation

                     FIGURE 5.11 Stationary Portfolio of ES and VX
FIGURE 5.12 Cumulative Returns of VX-ES Mean
Reversion Strategy

of the residuals determined in the training set.The APR on the test set July

29, 2010, to May 8, 2012, is 12.3 percent, with a Sharpe ratio of 1.4. It was

particularly profitable starting around the time of the Standard and Poor's

downgrade of the U.S. credit rating.The cumulative returns curve is shown

in Figure 5.12.                                                                131

There is a differentVX versus ES strategy that we can employ, which does       MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

not rely on the mean-reverting properties of the spreadVX-ES. Because that

is a momentum strategy, I will discuss it in the next chapter.

KEY POINTS

· "Commodity" currencies as a group offer many opportunities for
   cointegration.

· In computing the returns of a portfolio with two currency cross-rates, did
   you pay attention to whether they have the same quote currency, the same
   base currency, or neither? The formulae for computing returns are not the
   same for all cases.

· Futures returns consist of two components: spot returns and roll returns.
· Backwardation means roll returns are positive, and far contracts are

   cheaper than near contracts. Contango means roll returns are negative, and
   far contracts are more expensive than near contracts.
· Because of roll returns, mean reversion of the spot price may not induce
   mean reversion of the futures price.
· Mean reversion of futures calendar spreads of traded assets depends on
   mean reversion of roll returns.
                                                        CHAPTER 6

Interday
Momentum
Strategies

There are four main causes of momentum:                                           133

1. For futures, the persistence of roll returns, especially of their signs.
2. The slow diffusion, analysis, and acceptance of new information.
3. The forced sales or purchases of assets of various type of funds.
4. Market manipulation by high-frequency traders.

   We will be discussing trading strategies that take advantage of each cause
of momentum in this and the next chapter. In particular, roll returns of fu-
tures, which featured prominently in the last chapter, will again take center
stage. Myriad futures strategies can be constructed out of the persistence of
the sign of roll returns.

   Researchers sometimes classify momentum in asset prices into two types:
time series momentum and cross-sectional momentum, just as we classified
mean reversion into two corresponding types in Chapter 2 (Moskowitz,
Yao, and Pedersen, 2010). Time series momentum is very simple and in-
tuitive: past returns of a price series are positively correlated with future
returns. Cross-sectional momentum refers to the relative performance of a
price series in relation to other price series: a price series with returns that
outperformed other price series will likely keep doing so in the future and
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGvice versa.We will examine examples of both types in momentum in futures
         and stocks.

            The strategies I describe in this chapter tend to hold positions for mul-
         tiple days, which is why I call them "interday" momentum strategies. I will
         consider the intraday, higher-frequency momentum strategies in the next
         chapter. The reason for this distinction is that many interday momentum
         strategies suffer from a recently discovered weakness, while intraday mo-
         mentum strategies are less affected by it. I will highlight this weakness in
         this chapter, and also discuss the very different properties of momentum
         strategies versus their mean-reverting counterparts, as well as their pros
         and cons.

         Tests for Time Series Momentum

         Before we delve into the different causes of momentum, we should first
         see how we can measure momentum, or more specifically, time series mo-
         mentum.Time series momentum of a price series means that past returns
         are positively correlated with future returns. It follows that we can just
         calculate the correlation coefficient of the returns together with its p-value
134 (which represents the probability for the null hypothesis of no correla-
         tion). One feature of computing the correlation coefficient is that we have
         to pick a specific time lag for the returns. Sometimes, the most positive
         correlations are between returns of different lags. For example, 1-day re-
         turns might show negative correlations, while the correlation between past
         20-day return with the future 40-day return might be very positive. We
         should find the optimal pair of past and future periods that gives the highest
         positive correlation and use that as our look-back and holding period for
         our momentum strategy.

            Alternatively, we can also test for the correlations between the signs of
         past and future returns.This is appropriate when all we want to know is that
         an up move will be followed by another up move, and we don't care whether
         the magnitudes of the moves are similar.

            If we are interested instead in finding out whether there is long-term
         trending behavior in the time series without regard to specific time frames,
         we can calculate the Hurst exponent together with the Variance Ratio test
         to rule out the null hypothesis of random walk.These tests were described
         in Chapter 2 for the detection of mean reversion, but they can just as well
         be used as momentum tests.
         Look-back            Hold days
                    Look-back
                                         Hold days

         Look-back  Hold days

                    Look-back            Hold days

FIGURE 6.1 Nonoverlapping Periods for Correlation Calculations

   I will illustrate the use of these tests below using the two-year Treasury                                          INTERDAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES
note future TU trading on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) as an
example.The correlation coefficient and its p-value can be computed using
the MATLAB function corrcoef, while the Hurst exponent andVariance Ratio
test are, as before, given by genhurst and vratiotest.

   In computing the correlations of pairs of returns resulting from different
look-back and holding periods, we must take care not to use overlapping
data. If look-back is greater than the holding period, we have to shift for-
ward by the holding period to generate a new returns pair. If the holding 135
period is greater than the look-back, we have to shift forward by the look-
back period.This is illustrated in Figure 6.1.

   The top two bars in Figure 6.1 are for the case where look-back is greater
than the holding period.The top bar represents the data set that forms the
first returns pair, and the second bar from the top represents the data set
that forms the second independent returns pair.The bottom two bars are for
the case where the look-back is smaller than the holding. The code is listed
below (and available for download as TU_mom.m).

BOX 6.1  Finding Correlations between Returns of Different Time Frames
             % Correlation tests
             for lookback=[1 5 10 25 60 120 250]
                for holddays=[1 5 10 25 60 120 250]
                        ret_lag=(cl-backshift(lookback, cl)) ...
                           ./backshift(lookback, cl);
                        ret_fut=(fwdshift(holddays, cl)-cl)./cl;
                        badDates=any([isnan(ret_lag) isnan(ret_fut)], 2);

                                                                                                         (Continued )
                                        ret_lag(badDates)=[];BOX 6.1 (Continued )
                                        ret_fut(badDates)=[];
ALGORITHMIC TRADING
                                        if (lookback >= holddays)
                                                indepSet=[1:lookback:length(ret_lag)];

                                        else
                                                indepSet=[1:holddays:length(ret_lag)];

                                        end

                                        ret_lag=ret_lag(indepSet);
                                        ret_fut=ret_fut(indepSet);

                                        [cc, pval]=corrcoef(ret_lag, ret_fut);
                                        fprintf(1, `lookback=%3i holddays=%3i cc=%7.4f ...

                                           pval=%6.4f\n', lookback, holddays, cc(1, 2), ...
                                           pval(1, 2));
                                 end
                             end

            If we shift the data forward by one day, we will get a slightly different set
136 of returns for computing our correlations. For simplicity, I have only tested

         correlation of one among many possible sets of returns, but because of the
         large overlap of data between two different sets of returns, the results are
         unlikely to be greatly different. Some of the more significant results are
         tabulated in Table 6.1.

            We see that there is a compromise between the correlation coefficient
         and the p-value.The following (look-back, holding days) pairs offer some of
         the best compromises: (60, 10), (60, 25), (250, 10), (250, 25), (250, 60),
         (250, 120). Of course, from a trading point of view, we prefer as short a
         holding period as possible as those tend to generate the best Sharpe ratios.

            I have also tested the correlations between the signs of past and future
         returns instead, and the results are not very different fromTable 6.1. I found
         the best pair candidates in that case are (60, 10), (250, 10), and (250, 25).

            In contrast, we found that the Hurst exponent is 0.44, while theVariance
         Ratio test failed to reject the hypothesis that this is a random walk.

            How are these two conflicting results reconciled? As we show in the cor-
         relation tests, this time series (as with many other financial time series)
         exhibits momentum and mean reversion at different time frames.The Vari-
         ance Ratio test is unable to test the specific time frames where the correla-
         tions might be stronger than average.
TABLE 6.1 Correlations between TU Returns of Different Time Frames

Look-back  Holding days Correlation coefficient  p-value

25         1    ­0.0140                          0.5353

25         5    0.0319                           0.5276

25         10   0.1219                           0.0880

25         25   0.1955                           0.0863

25         60   0.2333                           0.0411

25         120  0.1482                           0.2045

25         250  0.2620                           0.0297

60         1    0.0313                           0.1686

60         5    0.0799                           0.1168

60         10   0.1718                           0.0169

60         25   0.2592                           0.0228

60         60   0.2162                           0.2346

60         120  ­0.0331                          0.8598

60         250  0.3137                           0.0974

120        1    0.0222                           0.3355

120        5    0.0565                           0.2750

120        10   0.0955                           0.1934

120        25   0.1456                           0.2126                          137

120        60   ­0.0192                          0.9182                          INTERDAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES

120        120  0.2081                           0.4567

120        250  0.4072                           0.1484

250        1    0.0411                           0.0857

250        5    0.1068                           0.0462

250        10   0.1784                           0.0185

250        25   0.2719                           0.0238

250        60   0.4245                           0.0217

250        120  0.5112                           0.0617

250        250  0.4873                           0.3269

 Time Series Strategies

For a certain future, if we find that the correlation coefficient between a
past return of a certain look-back and a future return of a certain holding
period is high, and the p-value is small, we can proceed to see if a profitable
momentum strategy can be found using this set of optimal time periods.
Since Table 6.1 shows us that for TU, the 250-25-days pairs of returns have
                     a correlation coefficient of 0.27 with a p-value of 0.02, we will pick this
                     look-back and holding period.We take our cue for a simple time series mo-
                     mentum strategy from a paper by Moskowitz,Yao, and Pedersen: simply buy
                     (sell) the future if it has a positive (negative) 12-month return, and hold the
                     position for 1 month (Moskowitz,Yao, and Pedersen, 2012).We will modify
                     one detail of the original strategy: Instead of making a trading decision every
                     month, we will make it every day, each day investing only one twenty-fifth
                     of the total capital.

                     Example 6.1:TU Momentum Strategy

                     This code assumes the closing prices are contained in a T × 1 array cl.
                     This code is contained in TU_mom.m.

                         lookback=250;
                         holddays=25;

                     longs=cl > backshift(lookback, cl) ;
                     shorts=cl < backshift(lookback, cl) ;

138                  pos=zeros(length(cl), 1);

ALGORITHMIC TRADING  for h=0:holddays-1
                            long_lag=backshift(h, longs);
                            long_lag(isnan(long_lag))=false;
                            long_lag=logical(long_lag);

                     short_lag=backshift(h, shorts);
                     short_lag(isnan(short_lag))=false;
                     short_lag=logical(short_lag);

                            pos(long_lag)=pos(long_lag)+1;
                            pos(short_lag)=pos(short_lag)-1;
                     end

                     ret=(backshift(1, pos).*(cl-lag(cl))./lag(cl))/holddays;

                        From June 1, 2004, to May 11, 2012, the Sharpe ratio is a respectable
                     1. The annual percentage rate (APR) of 1.7 percent may seem low, but our
                     return is calculated based on the notional value of the contract, which is
           FIGURE 6.2 Equity Curve of TU Momentum Strategy

about $200,000. Margin requirement for this contract is only about $400.          INTERDAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES
So you can certainly employ a reasonable amount of leverage to boost re-
turn, though one must also contend with the maximum drawdown of 2.5
percent.The equity curve also looks quite attractive (see Figure 6.2).

   This simple strategy can be applied to all kinds of futures contracts, with 139
different optimal look-back periods and the holding days. The results for
three futures we considered are listed in Table 6.2.

   Why do many futures returns exhibit serial correlations? And why do
these serial correlations occur only at a fairly long time scale? The expla-
nation lies in the roll return component of the total return of futures we
discussed in Chapter 5.Typically, the sign of roll returns does not vary very
often. In other words, the futures stay in contango or backwardation over
long periods of time. The spot returns, however, can vary very rapidly in
both sign and magnitude. So if we hold a future over a long period of time,
and if the average roll returns dominate the average total returns, we will
find serial correlation of total returns. This explanation certainly makes
sense for BR, HG, and TU, since from Table 5.1 we can see that they all have

TABLE 6.2 Time Series Momentum Strategies for Various Futures

Symbol     Look-back Holding days APR  Sharpe ratio Max drawdown

BR (CME)   100  10  17.7%              1.09                    ­14.8%

HG (CME)   40   40  18.0%              1.05                    ­24.0%

TU (CBOT)  250  25  1.7%               1.04                    ­2.5%
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGroll returns that are bigger in magnitude than their spot returns. (I haven't
         found the reason why it doesn't work for C, despite its having the largest roll
         return magnitude compared to its average spot return, but maybe you can!)

            If we accept the explanation that the time series momentum of futures
         is due to the persistence of the signs of the roll returns, then we can devise
         a cleaner and potentially better momentum signal than the lagged total re-
         turn.We can use the lagged roll return as a signal instead, and go long when
         this return is higher than some threshold, go short when this return is lower
         than the negative of that threshold, and exit any existing position otherwise.
         Applying this revised strategy on TU with a threshold of an annualized roll
         return of 3 percent yields a higher APR of 2.5 percent and Sharpe ratio of
         2.1 from January 2, 2009, to August 13, 2012, with a reduced maximum
         drawdown of 1.1 percent.

            There are many other possible entry signals besides the simple "sign of re-
         turn" indicator. For example, we can buy when the price reaches a new N-day
         high, when the price exceeds the N-day moving average or exponential mov-
         ing average, when the price exceeds the upper Bollinger band, or when the
         number of up days exceeds the number of down days in a moving period.

            There is also a classic momentum strategy called the Alexander Filter,
140 which tells us to buy when the daily return moves up at least x percent, and

         then sell and go short if the price moves down at least x percent from a sub-
         sequent high (Fama and Blume, 1966).

            Sometimes, the combination of mean-reverting and momentum rules may
         work better than each strategy by itself. One example strategy on CL is this:
         buy at the market close if the price is lower than that of 30 days ago and is high-
         er than that of 40 days ago; vice versa for shorts. If neither the buy nor the sell
         condition is satisfied, flatten any existing position.The APR is 12 percent, with
         a Sharpe ratio of 1.1.Adding a mean-reverting filter to the momentum strategy
         in Example 6.1 will add IBX (MEFF), KT (NYMEX), SXF (DE), US (CBOT),
         CD (CME), NG (NYMEX), and W (CME) to Table 6.2, and it will also im-
         prove the returns and Sharpe ratios of the existing contracts in that table.

            In fact, if you don't want to construct your own time series momentum
         strategy, there is a ready-made index that is composed of 24 futures: the Stan-
         dard & Poor's (S&P) Diversified Trends Indicator (DTI).The essential strat-
         egy behind this index is that we will long a future if it is above its exponential
         moving average, and short it if it is below, with monthly rebalancing. (For
         details, you can visit www.standardandpoors.com.) There is a mutual fund
         (RYMFX) as well as an exchange-traded fund (WDTI) that tracks this index.
         Michael Dever computed that the Sharpe ratio of this index was 1.3 with
a maximum drawdown of ­16.6 percent from January 1988 to December                INTERDAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES
2010 (Dever, 2011). (This may be compared to the S&P 500 index SPX,
which has a Sharpe ratio of 0.61 and a maximum drawdown of ­50.96 per-
cent over the same period, according to the author.) However, in common
with many other momentum strategies, its performance is poor since the
2008 financial crisis, a point that will be taken up later.

   Since there aren't many trades in the relatively limited amount of test
data that we used due to the substantial holding periods, there is a risk of
data-snooping bias in these results.The real test for the strategy is, as always,
in true out-of-sample testing.

 Extracting Roll Returns through
   Future versus ETF Arbitrage

If futures' total returns = spot returns + roll returns, then an obvious way
to extract roll return is buy the underlying asset and short the futures, if the
roll return is negative (i.e., under contango); and vice versa if the roll return
is positive (i.e., under backwardation).This will work as long as the sign of
the roll return does not change quickly, as it usually doesn't.This arbitrage 141
strategy is also likely to result in a shorter holding period and a lower risk
than the buy-and-hold strategy discussed in the previous section, since in
that strategy we needed to hold the future for a long time before the noisy
spot return can be averaged out.

   However, the logistics of buying and especially shorting the underlying
asset is not simple, unless an exchange-traded fund (ETF) exists that holds
the asset. Such ETFs can be found for many precious metals. For example,
GLD actually owns physical gold, and thus tracks the gold spot price very
closely. Gold futures have a negative roll return of ­4.9 percent annualized
from December 1982 to May 2004. A backtest shows that holding a long
position in GLD and a short position in GC yields an annualized return of
1.9 percent and a maximum drawdown of 0.8 percent from August 3, 2007,
to August 2, 2010. This might seem attractive, given that one can apply a
leverage of 5 or 6 and get a decent return with reasonable risk, but in reality
it is not. Remember that in contrast to owning futures, owning GLD actu-
ally incurs financing cost, which is not very different from 1.9 percent over
the backtest period! So the excess return of this strategy is close to zero.

   (The astute reader might notice another caveat of our quick backtest of
GC versus GLD: the settlement or closing prices of GC are recorded at
ALGORITHMIC TRADING1:30 p.m. ET, while those of GLD are recorded at 4:00 p.m. ET. This asyn-
         chronicity is a pitfall that I mentioned in Chapter 1. However, it doesn't
         matter to us in this case because the trading signals are generated based on
         GC closing prices alone.)

            If we try to look outside of precious metals ETFs to find such arbitrage
         opportunities, we will be stumped.There are no ETFs that hold other physi-
         cal commodities as opposed to commodities futures, due to the substantial
         storage costs of those commodities. However, there is a less exact form of
         arbitrage that allows us to extract the roll returns. ETFs containing com-
         modities producing companies often cointegrate with the spot price of
         those commodities, since these commodities form a substantial part of their
         assets. So we can use these ETFs as proxy for the spot price and use them to
         extract the roll returns of the corresponding futures.

            One good example is the arbitrage between the energy sector ETF XLE and
         theWTI crude oil futures CL. Since XLE and CL have different closing times, it
         is easier to study the arbitrage between XLE and the ETF USO instead, which
         contains nothing but front month contracts of CL.The strategy is simple:
          Short USO and long XLE whenever CL is in contango.
142  Long USO and short XLE whenever CL is in backwardation.
         The APR is a very respectable 16 percent from April 26, 2006, to April 9,
         2012, with a Sharpe ratio of about 1. I have plotted the cumulative returns
         curve in Figure 6.3.

                           FIGURE 6.3 Cumulative Returns of XLE-USO Arbitrage
   What about a future whose underlying is not a traded commodity? VX
is an example of such a future: It is very expensive to maintain a basket of
options that replicate the underlying VIX index, and no ETF sponsors have
been foolish enough to do that. But, again, we do not need to find an instru-
ment that tracks the spot price exactly--we just need to find one that has
a high correlation (or anti-correlation) with the spot return. In the case of
VIX, the familiar ETF SPY fits the bill. Because the S&P E-mini future ES has
insignificant roll return (about 1 percent annualized), it has almost the same
returns as the underlying asset. Because it is certainly easier to trade futures
than an ETF, we will investigate the performance of our earlier arbitrage
strategy using ES instead.

Volatility Futures versus Equity Index Futures:
Redux

VX is a natural choice if we want to extract roll returns: its roll returns

can be as low as ­50 percent annualized. At the same time, it is highly anti-

correlated with ES, with a correlation coefficient of daily returns reaching

­75 percent. In Chapter 5, we used the cointegration between VX and ES

to develop a profitable mean-reverting strategy. Here, we will make use of        143
the large roll return magnitude of VX, the small roll return magnitude of
                                                                                  INTERDAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES
ES, and the anticorrelation ofVX and ES to develop a momentum strategy.

This strategy was proposed by Simon and Campasano (2012):

1. If the price of the front contract of VX is higher than that of VIX by 0.1
   point (contango) times the number of trading days untill settlement,
   short 0.3906 front contracts of VX and short 1 front contract of ES.
   Hold for one day.

2. If the price of the front contract of VX is lower than that of VIX by 0.1
   point (backwardation) times the number of trading days untill settle-
   ment, buy 0.3906 front contracts of VX and buy 1 front contract of ES.
   Hold for one day.

Recall that if the front contract price is higher than the spot price, the roll
return is negative (see Figure 5.3). So the difference in price betweenVIX and
VX divided by the time to maturity is the roll return, and we buy VX if the
roll return is positive.Why didn't we use the procedure in Example 5.3 where
we use the slope of the futures log forward curve to compute the roll return
here? That is because Equation 5.7 doesn't work for VX, and therefore the VX
forward prices do not fall on a straight line, as explained in Chapter 5.
                     FIGURE 6.4 Cumulative Returns of VX-ES Roll Returns Strategy

                     Notice that the hedge ratio of this strategy is slightly different from that

                     reported by Simon and Campasano: It is based on the regression fit between

                     the VX versus ES prices in Equation 5.11, not between their returns as in

                     the original paper.The settlement is the day after the contracts expire.The

144                  APR for July 29, 2010, to May 7, 2012 (this period was not used for hedge
                     ratio determination) is 6.9 percent, with a Sharpe ratio of 1.The cumulative
ALGORITHMIC TRADING
                     return chart is displayed in Figure 6.4.You can find the MATLAB code for

                     this strategy in VX_ES_rollreturn.m on my website.

                      Cross-Sectional Strategies

                     There is a third way to extract the often large roll returns in futures besides
                     buying and holding or arbitraging against the underlying asset (or against an
                     instrument correlated with the underlying asset). This third way is a cross-
                     sectional strategy:We can just buy a portfolio of futures in backwardation,
                     and simultaneously short a portfolio of futures in contango.The hope is that
                     the returns of the spot prices cancel each other out (a not unreasonable
                     expectation if we believe commodities' spot prices are positively correlated
                     with economic growth or some other macroeconomic indices), and we are
                     left with the favorable roll returns. Daniel and Moskowitz described just
                     such a simple "cross-sectional" momentum strategy that is almost a mir-
                     ror image of the linear long-short mean-reverting stock model proposed
                     by Khandani and Lo described in Chapter 3, albeit one with a much longer
                     look-back and holding period (Daniel and Moskowitz, 2011).
                FIGURE 6.5 Cumulative Returns of Cross-Sectional                  INTERDAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES
                Futures Momentum Strategy

   A simplified version of the strategy is to rank the 12-month return (or 252
trading days in our program below) of a group of 52 physical commodities
every day, and buy and hold the future with the highest return for 1 month (or 145
25 trading days) while short and hold the future with the lowest return for the
same period. I tested this strategy from June 1, 2005, to December 31, 2007,
and the APR is an excellent 18 percent with a Sharpe ratio of 1.37.The cumu-
lative returns are plotted in Figure 6.5. Unfortunately, this model performed
very negatively from January 2, 2008, to December 31, 2009, with an APR of
­33 percent, though its performance recovered afterwards.The financial crisis
of 2008­2009 ruined this momentum strategy, just like it did many others,
including the S&P DTI indicator mentioned before.

   Daniel and Moskowitz have also found that this same strategy worked for
the universe of world stock indices, currencies, international stocks, and
U.S. stocks--in other words, practically everything under the sun. Obvi-
ously, cross-sectional momentum in currencies and stocks can no longer be
explained by the persistence of the sign of roll returns.We might attribute
that to the serial correlation in world economic or interest rate growth in
the currency case, and the slow diffusion, analysis, and acceptance of new
information in the stock case.

   Applying this strategy to U.S. stocks, we can buy and hold stocks within
the top decile of 12-month lagged returns for a month, and vice versa for
the bottom decile. I illustrate the strategy in Example 6.2.
                     Example 6.2: Cross-Sectional Momentum
                                   Strategy for Stocks

                     This code assumes the close prices are contained in T × N array cl,
                     where T is the number of trading days, and N is the number of the
                     stocks in S&P 500. It makes use of utilities functions smartsum and
                     backshift, available from http://epchan.com/book2.The code itself
                     can be downloaded as kentdaniel.m.

                         lookback=252;

                         holddays=25;

                         topN=50;

                     ret=(cl- backshift(lookback,cl))./backshift(lookback,cl);
                        % daily returns

                     longs=false(size(ret));
                     shorts=false(size(ret));

146                  positions=zeros(size(ret));
                     for t=lookback+1:length(tday)
ALGORITHMIC TRADING
                          [foo idx]=sort(ret(t, :), `ascend');
                          nodata=find(isnan(ret(t, :)));
                          idx=setdiff(idx, nodata, `stable');
                          longs(t, idx(end-topN+1:end))=true;
                          shorts(t, idx(1:topN))=true;
                     end

                     for h=0:holddays-1
                            long_lag=backshift(h, longs);
                            long_lag(isnan(long_lag))=false;
                            long_lag=logical(long_lag);

                            short_lag=backshift(h, shorts);
                            short_lag(isnan(short_lag))=false;
                            short_lag=logical(short_lag);

                            positions(long_lag)=positions(long_lag)+1;
                            positions(short_lag)=positions(short_lag)-1;
                     end

                     dailyret=smartsum(backshift(1, positions).*(cl-lag(cl)) ...
                        ./ lag(cl), 2)/(2*topN)/holddays;

                     dailyret(isnan(dailyret))=0;
                           Example 6.2 (Continued)                                INTERDAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES
     The APR from May 15, 2007, to December 31, 2007, is 37
  percent with a Sharpe ratio of 4.1.The cumulative returns are shown
  in Figure 6.6. (Daniel and Moskowitz found an annualized average
  return of 16.7 percent and a Sharpe ratio of 0.83 from 1947 to
  2007.) However, the APR from January 2, 2008, to December 31,
  2009, is a miserable ­30 percent.The financial crisis of 2008­2009
  also ruined this momentum strategy.The return after 2009 did
  stabilize, though it hasn't returned to its former high level yet.

   Just as in the case of the cross-sectional mean reversion strategy discussed
in Chapter 4, instead of ranking stocks by their lagged returns, we can rank
them by many other variables, or "factors," as they are usually called.While
we wrote total return = spot return + roll return for futures, we can write
total return = market return + factor returns for stocks.A cross-sectional portfo-
lio of stocks, whether mean reverting or momentum based, will eliminate
the market return component, and its returns will be driven solely by the
factors.These factors may be fundamental, such as earnings growth or book- 147
to-price ratio, or some linear combination thereof. Or they may be statisti-
cal factors that are derived from, for example, Principal Component Analy-
sis (PCA) as described in Quantitative Trading (Chan, 2009). All these factors

                FIGURE 6.6 Cumulative Returns of Cross-Sectional
                Stock Momentum Strategy
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGwith the possible exception of PCA tend to change slowly, so using them
         to rank stocks will result in as long holding periods as the cross-sectional
         models I discussed in this section.

            While we are on the subject of factors, it bears mentioning that a factor
         model can be applied to a cross-sectional portfolio of futures as well. In this
         case, we can find macroeconomic factors such as gross domestic product
         (GDP) growth or inflation rate and correlate them with the returns of each
         futures instrument, or we can again employ PCA.

            In recent years, with the advance of computer natural language process-
         ing and understanding capability, there is one other factor that has come into
         use.This is the so-called news sentiment score, our next topic.

       News Sentiment as a Fundamental Factor

         With the advent of machine-readable, or "elementized," newsfeeds, it is now
         possible to programmatically capture all the news items on a company, not
         just those that fit neatly into one of the narrow categories such as earnings
         announcements or merger and acquisition (M&A) activities. Furthermore,
         natural language processing algorithms are now advanced enough to analyze
         the textual information contained in these news items, and assign a "senti-
148 ment score" to each news article that is indicative of its price impact on a
         stock, and an aggregation of these sentiment scores from multiple news ar-
         ticles from a certain period was found to be predictive of its future return.
         For example, Hafez and Xie, using RavenPack's Sentiment Index, found that
         buying a portfolio of stocks with positive sentiment change and shorting
         one with negative sentiment change results in an APR from 52 percent to
         156 percent and Sharpe ratios from 3.9 to 5.3 before transaction costs, de-
         pending on how many stocks are included in the portfolios (Hafez and Xie,
         2012).The success of these cross-sectional strategies also demonstrates very
         neatly that the slow diffusion of news is the cause of stock momentum.

            There are other vendors besides RavenPack that provide news senti-
         ments on stocks. Examples include Recorded Future, thestocksonar.com,
         and Thomson Reuters News Analytics. They differ on the scope of their
         news coverage and also on the algorithm they use to generate the senti-
         ment score. If you believe your own sentiment algorithm is better than
         theirs, you can subscribe directly to an elementized news feed instead
         and apply your algorithm to it. I mentioned before that Newsware offers
         a low-cost version of this type of news feeds, but offerings with lower
         latency and better coverage are provided by Bloomberg Event-Driven
Trading, Dow Jones Elementized News Feeds, and Thomson Reuters Ma-
chine Readable News.

   Beyond such very reasonable use of news sentiment as a factor for cross-
sectional momentum trading, there has also been research that suggested
the general "mood" of society as revealed in the content of Twitter feeds is
predictive of the market index itself (Bollen, Mao, and Zeng, 2010). In fact,
a multimillion-dollar hedge fund was launched to implement this outland-
ish idea (Bryant, 2010), though the validity of the research itself was under
attack (Buy the Hype, 2012).

Mutual Funds Asset Fire Sale and
Forced Purchases

Researchers Coval and Stafford (2007) found that mutual funds experienc-

ing large redemptions are likely to reduce or eliminate their existing stock

positions. This is no surprise since mutual funds are typically close to fully

invested, with very little cash reserves. More interestingly, funds experienc-

ing large capital inflows tend to increase their existing stock positions rather

than using the additional capital to invest in other stocks, perhaps because

new investment ideas do not come by easily. Stocks disproportionately held             149
by poorly performing mutual funds facing redemptions therefore experi-
                                                                                       INTERDAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES
ence negative returns. Furthermore, this asset "fire sale" by poorly perform-

ing mutual funds is contagious. Since the fire sale depresses the stock prices,

they suppress the performance of other funds holding those stocks, too,

causing further redemptions at those funds. The same situation occurs in

reverse for stocks disproportionately held by superbly performing mutual

funds with large capital inflows. Hence, momentum in both directions for

the commonly held stocks can be ignited.

(This ignition of price momentum due to order flow is actually a rather

general phenomenon, and it happens at even the shortest time scale.We find

more details on that in the context of high-frequency trading in Chapter 7.)

A factor can be constructed to measure the selling (buying) pressure on

a stock based on the net percentage of funds holding them that experienced

redemptions (inflows). More precisely,

PRESSURE(i, t)                          (Sell(  j  i,t)|  flow(  j,t)  <  -5%)

=j                                      j

                  Own(  j,i,t             -1)                                   (6.1)

                  j
ALGORITHMIC TRADINGwhere PRESSURE(i, t) is the factor for stock i at the end of quarter t,
         Buy( j, i, t) = 1 if fund j increased its holding in stock i during the quarter t
         and if the fund experienced inflows greater than 5 percent of its net asset
         value (NAV) ("flow( j, t) > 5%"), and zero otherwise. Sell( j, i, t) is similarly
         defined for decreases in holdings, and jOwn( j, i, t - 1) is the total number
         of mutual funds holding stock i the beginning of quarter t.

            Note that the PRESSURE variable does not take into account the size
         (NAV) of the fund, as Buy is a binary variable. One wonders whether weigh-
         ing Buy by NAV will give better results.

            Coval and Stafford found that a market-neutral portfolio formed based
         on shorting stocks with highest selling pressure (bottom decile of PRESSURE
         ranking) and buying stocks with the highest (top decile of PRESSURE rank-
         ing) buying pressure generates annualized returns of about 17 percent be-
         fore transaction costs. (Since data on stock holdings are available generally
         on a quarterly basis only, our portfolio is updated quarterly as well.)

            Furthermore, capital flows into and out of mutual funds can be predicted
         with good accuracy based on their past performance and capital flows, a
         reflection of the herdlike behavior of retail investors. Based on this predic-
         tion, we can also predict the future value of the pressure factor noted above.
150 In other words, we can front-run the mutual funds in our selling (buying)
         of the stocks they currently own.This front-running strategy generates an-
         other 17 percent annualized return before transaction costs.

            Finally, since these stocks experience such selling and buying pressures due
         to liquidity-driven reasons, and suffer suppression or elevation of their prices
         through no fault or merit on their own, their stock prices often mean-revert
         after the mutual fund selling or buying pressure is over. Indeed, buying stocks
         that experienced the most selling pressure in the t - 4 up to the t - 1 quarters,
         and vice versa, generates another 7 percent annualized returns.

            Combining all three strategies (momentum, front running, and mean
         reverting) generates a total return of about 41 percent before transaction
         costs. However, the slippage component of the transaction costs is likely
         to be significant because we may experience delays in getting mutual fund
         holdings information at the end of a quarter. In addition, the implementa-
         tion of this strategy is not for the faint-of-heart: clean and accurate mu-
         tual holdings and returns data have to be purchased from the Center for
         Research in Security Prices (CRSP) at a cost of about $10,000 per year
         of data.

            Mutual funds are not the only type of funds that can induce momentum
         in stocks due to forced asset sales and purchases. In Chapter 7, we will
