ALGORITHMIC TRADING
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publish-
ing company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe,
Australia, and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and mar-
keting print and electronic products and services for our customers'
professional and personal knowledge and understanding.

   The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market's ever changing temperament and have prospered--some
by reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a
novice trader, professional, or somewhere in-between, these books will
provide the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into
the future.

   For a list of available titles, visit our website at www.WileyFinance.com.
ALGORITHMIC
  TRADING

         Winning Strategies and
              Their Rationale

       Ernest P. Chan
Cover image: © Oleksiy Lebedyev/istock
Cover design:Wiley

Copyright © 2013 by Ernest P. Chan. All rights reserved.

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax
(978) 646-8600, or on theWeb at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should
be addressed to the Permissions Department, JohnWiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer ofWarranty:While the publisher and author have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy
or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials.The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable
for your situation.You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor
author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.

For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.

Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand.
If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased,
you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley
products, visit www.wiley.com.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:

Chan, Ernest P., 1966­
  Algorithmic trading : winning strategies and their rationale / Ernest P. Chan.
      pages cm. -- (Wiley trading series)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-118-46014-6 (cloth)
 1. Investment analysis. 2. Stocks. 3. Exchange traded funds. 4. Algorithms.
 5. Program trading (Securities) I.Title.
 HG4529.C443 2013
 332.63'2042--dc23
                                                                           2013008380

Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
To my parents, HungYip and Ching, and my partner, Ben
            CONTENTS

Preface                                           ix

CHAPTER 1 Backtesting and Automated Execution     1

CHAPTER 2 The Basics of Mean Reversion            39

CHAPTER 3 Implementing Mean Reversion Strategies  63
CHAPTER 4 Mean Reversion of Stocks and ETFs       87 vii

CHAPTER 5 Mean Reversion of Currencies and Futures 107

CHAPTER 6 Interday Momentum Strategies            133

CHAPTER 7 Intraday Momentum Strategies            155

CHAPTER 8 Risk Management                         169

Conclusion                                        187

Bibliography                                      191

About the Author                                  197

About the Website                                 199

Index                                             201
                     P R E FA C E

This book is a practical guide to algorithmic trading strategies that can be
     readily implemented by both retail and institutional traders. It is not an
academic treatise on financial theory. Rather, I hope to make accessible to

the reader some of the most useful financial research done in the past few

decades, mixing them with insights I gained from actually exploiting some

of those theories in live trading.                                                 ix

Because strategies take a central place in this book, we will cover a wide

array of them, broadly divided into the mean-reverting and momentum

camps, and we will lay out standard techniques for trading each category of

strategies, and equally important, the fundamental reasons why a strategy

should work. The emphasis throughout is on simple and linear strategies,

as an antidote to the overfitting and data-snooping biases that often plague

complex strategies.

In the mean-reverting camp, we will discuss the multiple statistical tech-

niques (augmented Dickey-Fuller [ADF] test, Hurst exponent,Variance Ra-

tio test, half-life) for detecting "time series" mean reversion or stationarity,

and for detecting cointegration of a portfolio of instruments (cointegrated

augmented Dickey Fuller [CADF] test, Johansen test). Beyond the mechani-

cal application of these statistical tests to time series, we strive to convey an

intuitive understanding of what they are really testing and the simple math-

ematical equations behind them.

We will explain the simplest techniques and strategies for trading mean-

reverting portfolios (linear, Bollinger band, Kalman filter), and whether us-

ing raw prices, log prices, or ratios make the most sense as inputs to these

tests and strategies. In particular, we show that the Kalman filter is useful
PREFACE to traders in multiple ways and in multiple strategies. Distinction between
        time series versus cross-sectional mean reversion will be made.We will de-
        bate the pros and cons of "scaling-in" and highlight the danger of data errors
        in mean-reverting strategies, especially those that deal with spreads.

           Examples of mean-reverting strategies will be drawn from interday and
        intraday stocks models, exchange-traded fund (ETF) pairs and triplets,
        ETFs versus their component stocks, currency pairs, and futures calen-
        dar and intermarket spreads.We will explain what makes trading some of
        these strategies quite challenging in recent years due to the rise of dark
        pools and high-frequency trading. We will also illustrate how certain fun-
        damental considerations can explain the temporary unhinging of a hitherto
        very profitable ETF pair and how the same considerations can lead one to
        construct an improved version of the strategy. When discussing currency
        trading, we take care to explain why even the calculation of returns may
        seem foreign to an equity trader, and where such concepts as rollover inter-
        est may sometimes be important. Much emphasis will be devoted to the
        study of spot returns versus roll returns in futures, and several futures trad-
        ing strategies can be derived or understood from a simple mathematical
        model of futures prices.The concepts of backwardation and contango will
x be illustrated graphically as well as mathematically. The chapter on mean
        reversion of currencies and futures cumulates in the study of a very special
        future: the volatility (VX) future, and how it can form the basis of some
        quite lucrative strategies.

           In the momentum camp, we start by explaining a few statistical tests for
        times series momentum. The main theme, though, is to explore the four
        main drivers of momentum in stocks and futures and to propose strategies
        that can extract time series and cross-sectional momentum. Roll returns in
        futures is one of those drivers, but it turns out that forced asset sales and
        purchases is the main driver of stock and ETF momentum in many diverse
        circumstances. Some of the newer momentum strategies based on news
        events, news sentiment, leveraged ETFs, order flow, and high-frequency
        trading will be covered. Finally, we will look at the pros and cons of mo-
        mentum versus mean-reverting strategies and discover their diametrically
        different risk-return characteristics under different market regimes in re-
        cent financial history.

           I have always maintained that it is easy to find published, supposedly
        profitable, strategies in the many books, magazines, or blogs out there,
        but much harder to see why they may be flawed and perhaps ultimately
        doomed. So, despite the emphasis on suggesting prototype strategies, we
