ICT fair value gaps, one of the most popular concepts in the retail trading world. And I thought, why not automate them? And what better way to automate than collaborating with Claude? In this series, we're going to build eight different ICT fair value gaps strategies all within one trading bot. And today we start with silver bullet. By the end of this video, you will know exactly how Claude and I built this ICT silver bullet trading bot from scratch. So, buckle up because we're going from concepts to rules to code to a fully functioning trading bot. So, with no more shenanigans, let's start. The journey we are embarking on with Claude is going to be eight different ICT fair value gap strategies. The one that we're going to be looking at today is called silver bullet, and the foundation of this strategy is threefold: the market structure shift, the liquidity sweep, and the fair value gaps. Now, if you don't understand the fair value gaps, it's a three-candlestick structure where you have a gap between the high of the first candle and the low of the second candle, and that gap is called fair value gap, and the assumption is that market is going to try to fill that gap. So, for a sell trade setup, you have the day's high at a certain cut-off time, let's say at the Asian session. And so, at the start of the London session, you determine the high and the low of the market. Once you have the high of the market, then we're waiting for a liquidity sweep, which is a candle that breaks the day's high, but then reverses back and closes within the day's high and day's low range. Once we have that liquidity sweep, then we can look back to identify the most recent low in the market, and that is what we call market structure shift. And then we wait for a candle to come and close below this structure for this MSS to be valid. Once it's validated, then a starting from the sweep candle, we look for all of the fair value gaps that the market has created. And we wait for the price to trade back into the fair value gap. Once it trades back into the fair value gap, we can put a stop order at the bottom of the fair value gap, expecting the market to return from here to the downside. It's a sell setup. Once the trade is taken, you can go for 1:1 risk to reward, 1 to 2 risk to reward, 1 to 3 risk to reward, and your stop loss can go above the fair value gap with a bit of buffer. Now, you can have one fair value gap, or you can have multiple fair value gaps during the day. And as long as your setup is still valid, you can trade these multiple FVGs. Now, on the buy side, the concept is in reverse. So, you have the day's low at the end of Asian session on London session, then you wait for the market structure and a liquidity sweep. Once the liquidity sweep happens, you look for the most recent swing high. Once a candle closes above that market structure shift, MSS becomes confirmed, and we start looking for the fair value gap is starting from the liquidity sweep candle. And we can take the trade at the upper boundary and put the stop loss below with a buffer, risk to reward 1 to 1, 1 to 2, or 1 to 3. So, now that we have covered the strategy that we're going to be automating today with Claude, let's say hello to Claude. Just like the revert to mean strategy that we coded with Claude a few weeks ago, let's start by building up a frame, which is you are an expert in MQL coding. You use trade.mqh, trade position info, see order info. And I told Claude that we're going to be building eight different ICT fair value gap strategies one by one into a single year. So, start with a structure, a user drop down, so the user can select which a strategy he wants to apply, and then the code should be able to follow. Then keep on tick clean with help of functions and use position info and order info. We will build the strategies one by one, but I want the basis structure to be solid and flexible, so we don't run into issues later on. So far, are we clear? Give me a short structure of how you will handle it. Claude came back with a basis structure plan, the file organization, input blocks, core functions that it's going to create, the FVG struct that it's going to create, the strategy enums on ticker structure, and told me that ready to build the strategy whenever I am. But there was one thing which I forgot to mention, so I mention it now, which is we're going to have to create two sections within on tick, one section for everything that is going to be run on every tick whenever a new price data arrives on the chart, and one section for things that are only going to be done once every new candle. We're going to have eight strategies. We cannot run everything in every one of those eight strategies on every tick because it's going to make the EA extremely slow. So, there are things, for example, the fair value gap detection, that doesn't need to happen on every tick. We can move things like those into a separate section, which is only going to be done every new candle. And after that, I started with the strategy. So, we're going to go step by step. Step one, determine the day's high and low. So, at a user-defined cutoff time, determine the high and the low of the current day. And once you have identified it, these remain fixed for the remainder of the day and do not change. Any concerns? If not, let's create the code so I can check it. Because it is a very complicated strategy, I wanted to build it a step by step. So, as a chart object, put a day's high and a day's low on the chart from the start of the day to the end of the day with dashed lines in gold color. User input, so user can change the color if he wants to. Claude had one question, which is what does the current trading day mean? When does it start? Broker time, New York time, or custom time? And I said, \\\"Trading day starts at the broker's midnight. So, use the broker server time.\\\" And I would prefer to have the format as hour hour colon minute minute. For not only for the cutoff time, but for every time input that we're going to ask the user to provide, we're going to use this format. And put a separate function where we're going to check all of the user-provided input against the format that we want to use it. And if any of the input is wrong, put a big bold error message on the chart. Claude said it's clear, clean approach, and asked me if we are ready to code. And I said, \\\"Yes.\\\" So, it has started building and gave me the first set of codes. These looks quite clean with the trade.mqh position info and order info as I asked. The on tick function is relatively very clean with an every tick section and an every new candle section. All fine. We copy it, go into MetaEditor, and we're going to call this ICT FVG Silver Bullet, and I'm going to call it version 1.1 because we are at a step one. Let's paste it, compile, and we don't have any errors. Let's look at the input settings. So, here now we have the Silver Bullet strategy. We have the magic number, slippage, cut-off time that the user can define, and show the day high or low as true or false, and in which color. So, let's run this thing. And here we can see at the start of the day, we have the day's high and day's low clearly marked, and once the cut-off time is hit, then these don't move anymore during the day. So, this is all good stuff. Let's see what happens the next day. And the next day the previous day's lines are removed, and we have a new day's high and day's low for the current day. So, that seems good, but one of the things that I don't like to see on my chart are these grid lines. So, let's go back to Claude and ask it to remove the grid lines, and put the bear candles in crimson color, and the bull candles in lime color. That's just how I like to see my chart. Simple addition, and we have the new lines of code. Let's copy it, go back to MetaEditor, paste it, compile, and now we have a clean chart without the grid lines. Brilliant. So, now let's go back to Claude and build a step number two, which is the liquidity sweep, which is when the price breaks the day's high or the day's low, and then sweeps back into the range again within a certain number of candles. The first valid liquidity sweep of the day becomes a liquidity sweep for that day. It stores the values, and all subsequent liquidity sweeps for that day must be ignored. So, we're only interested in the first liquidity sweep, not the ones that happen later. And as chart object, mark these liquidity sweeps with an arrow, and the reverse setup for the sell setup. Let's update the code so I can test that it's working. So, Claude has the full picture, and then something happened, and Claude got it stuck. So, I said continue. So, it has started adding, told me what it has added in step number two and gave me the code file. So, let's copy these codes. Let's go back to MetaEditor and these codes we are going to save as version 1.2 because we are on a step number two now. Compile and everything is still fine. Let's look into the input tab and here we have our liquidity sweep, the maximum number of candles to look back. So, let's run this thing. And here the liquidity sweep happens for the sell setup and we have an arrow marking it. So, let's go back to Claude with a step number three which is the market structure. So, after the liquidity sweep, we identify the most recent high and the way to do that will be using a fractal with a strength that the user can define. So, two for example will mean two candles to the right and two candles to the left. Then as chart object, I want the MSS level in a dash line in Dodger Blue color to be put on the chart as well. Claude asked for a confirmation that it understands it properly which is we are now looking for the most recent fractal high and most recent fractal low before the sweep bar. To which I said, \\\"Yes, the most recent before the liquidity sweep and look back 30 candles max which is a user input but within the current trading day.\\\" So, all clear. It has started building what's new in step number three and gave me the code file again. So, let's copy it, go back to MetaEditor and we're going to save it as version 1.3 and compile. And now if I run it and here I can see that after the liquidity sweep, the most recent swing low has been identified and marked with a blue dash line. Let's look for a buy setup as well and here the liquidity sweep to the downside and we have the most recent swing high identified and marked on the chart as well. But one thing which we can probably use here is the labeling. So, I went back to Claude and said, \\\"Let's label the MSS line as MSS buyer for buy setup and MSS sell for sell setup.\\\" And also for the liquidity sweep arrows, if it is the sweep of the day's high, then the arrow is red pointing down and if it is a sweep of the day's low, then it's an arrow in lime color pointing upwards. Claude said, \\\"Good.\\\" It understands everything, started to make the changes, added the MSS lines, and gave me the code files back again. So, we are going to copy it, go back to MetaEditor, but since we are in the same step as still, I'm just simply going to copy-paste it. Compile. And works properly. So, let's run it. And now, after the liquidity sweep, we have a red arrow pointing downwards, and the market is structure lines are now marked as MSS sell and MSS buy. And the sweep arrow for the liquidity range of the day's low is marked in green pointing upwards. So, the liquidity sweep of the high, the arrow looking downwards is on the candle itself, so it's not really clear. So, let's go back to Claude and say, \\\"The arrow for the day's high sweep is not in a good place. It needs to be above. Currently, it is lying on top of the candles.\\\" Claude says, \\\"Correct.\\\" Makes all the necessary changes what was wrong, fixes it, and then gives me the code file again, which we're going to copy, and we're going to paste it within the same version because we're still at step number three. Compile. Run. And now, I can see the liquidity sweep of the day's high, the red arrow is also visible on the chart. So, all good. Everything works perfectly so far. Thank you very much. And now, we go to step number four, which is the market structure shift. So, after the liquidity sweep, wait for a candle to close above the MSS level. We want it to be confirmed. A wick does not qualify. And if the MSS is not confirmed within an allowed number of candles, we want it to happen within a certain time lapse. Then, in that case, we invalidate the setup, and then there is no more buy setup for that day. The reverse is true for the sell. Chart objects, MSS labels are MSS buy unconfirmed and MSS sell unconfirmed until the time that they are confirmed. And once they are confirmed, this changes into MSS buy or sell confirmed. Claude needed a clarification, which is a time lapse candle. Counted from where? So, I said, \\\"Count it from the first candle after the sweep is confirmed.\\\" Default value of zero means no expiry, and MSS can be confirmed until the end of that day. So, Claude has started working again, made all the changes for the step four, and gave me the code file, which we're going to copy, and we're going to store it as version 1.04. Because maybe we're going to end up with more than nine steps, so I want some spacing. So, let's mark the versions as 1.01, 1.02, 1.03, and the current version as 1.04. Save, paste, and compile. Everything is fine so far. Now, let's go and run it. And now we see that when the liquidity sweep happens, the MSS sell line is unconfirmed. And once the price comes down and a candle closes below the MSS, this is where it became confirmed. Now, let's see for the buy side. So, yes, after the liquidity sweep, the MSS buy is unconfirmed, and it remains unconfirmed for the rest of the day. Everything is fine, works like a charm. Claude is amazing. And now we go to step number five, which is the fair value gap detection. So, only starts searching for the bullish fair value gap after the MSS has been confirmed. The search range begins at the liquidity sweep candle and includes all the candles up to and after the MSS confirmation. And because we are interested in trading multiple FVGs, so all valid bullish FVGs must be tracked. Remember, I mean, it's the opposite for the sell trade. And a new FVG does not invalidate the previous FVGs. It stores the values, and then comes the question of what if it is a one pip fair value gap? Do you want to trade that also? So, in that case, we need a minimum width for the fair value gaps to be valid. Now, you can provide hard-coded numbers like five pips and above, six pips and above, but that's not going to hold across time frames, because on a one-minute chart, 10 pips might mean a lot, but on a four-hour chart, 10 pips mean nothing. And this is where what we did in the river to mean here, linking the things to ATR, made sense to me. So, back to Claude, ignore the FVG's outside of the configured minimum and maximum size limit based on ATR 100, which is going to be a user input. And zero default, meaning it's not applied. Even if it is one pip, it's going to be traded. And for the chart object, put all of the detected FVG's in the normal ICT colors. And all of the historical setup remain visible for review and back testing as default. But give the user a toggle to turn off and turn on whether or not he wants to keep the history. Claude said, \\\"Good, but two questions. First is the definition of the FVG because different people might have different definitions, so it gave me the definition that it is the gap between the low of bar one high of bar two. Is that the definition that I'm using or do I have a variation?\\\" So, I said, \\\"Yes, the definition is fine, and that's what I'm using.\\\" Then for clarification two, it understood that all of the FVG's rectangles from previous days stay on the chart, but what if within the day there is a new sweep? To which my point was that we're only interested in the first sweep, so there can be no new FVG's for among new sweep. And if MSS becomes invalidated, then leave the FVG's still on the chart. And the third clarification Claude asked is if the price moves into the FVG's, do we change the color or do we keep it? And I said, \\\"I don't mind leaving them the traditional color even after activation, so color them only in the ICT FVG traditional colors.\\\" So, perfect. Just one last thing, what is the ICT FVG color? Are you happy with light blue and light orange? And I said, \\\"Fine, go with these as defaults, and if I end up selecting a different color, I'll tell you to change the defaults.\\\" So, Claude has started working on the thing. What's new in a step five? Made all the changes and gave me the code file. Let's copy it, save it as version 1.05. Paste. Compile. Let's look at the setting step. So, we have our strategy as silver bullet, cut off time 10. But, liquidity sweep we have added. The maximum number of candles within which the price must come back. Fractal strength as two, two candles to the right and two candles to the left in order to identify the most recent high or low. How many candles to look back as 30. How many candles do we allow for the MSS confirmation to happen? Default is zero. And then the FVG minimum size and the FVG maximum size based on ATR, 100 multiplier, and zero means not applied. And then at the bottom, the user has the ability to select the colors for the bullish and the bearish FVGs. And run. And here after the liquidity sweep, the market is structure was identified. Once a candle closed below it, it was confirmed. And immediately we see two FVGs appearing on the chart. And they seem to be very valid according to our definitions. The only thing I don't like is the orange color. And then we go on and we have many more FVGs identified. Some of them are actually outside of the day's range, which I also don't like. So, the first three I like because they are within the day's range of high and low. But, the other three are way below and I at least would not be interested in trading those. Let's look at the buy side as well. And here on the 13th of Jan, after the market is structure is confirmed, we see these FVGs appearing as well. But, some of them are outside of the day's high and low. So, that's the part that I don't like. So, let's go back to Claude. Like, yeah, I ran some visual tests and below are the observations. One, I would like to see the bullish FVG in lime color and the bearish FVG in hot pink. And some additional criteria. For first, the market is structure location, that if identifying a valid market structure for buy and sell, that should be within the day's high and low. And also for the fair value gap detection, it requires that it is inside the day's high and low, at least partially. Some part of it could be outside, but at least some part of it should be within the day's high and the day's low range. That makes sense? Claude said, \\\"Yes.\\\" The colors changed, making all the changes. What changed? And gave me the code files again. So, let's copy them again. Paste. Compile. And run. And after the confirmation of the MSS, we have three fair value gaps, but all of them within the day's range. Nothing outside. Let's look at the buy ones as well. So, after the liquidity sweep, we have the MSS confirmation, and now we have the FVG, which is at least partially within the day's range of high and low. And all the other ones are also forming within the range. I mean, they're very small that we can fix through the ATR number, but for now, at least all the codes are working properly. So, let's go back to our settings, and we're going to change the 100 ATR multiplier for the minimum FVG size to 0.5, so we don't get those funny one pip fair value gaps. We have our three sell side. And then on the buy side, we shouldn't see those very, very small ones. So, we have a decent size this one, and all the other very small ones which were appearing before on the 13th of Jan, they are now gone. So, you only have a decent size fair value gap to trade with the ATR value. Brilliant. And now, step six to step nine, we're going to do it in one go. So, step six is the fair value gap activation and putting the pending orders. So, when a valid bullish FVG is created, no orders are placed immediately. It only becomes activated when the price reaches or trades beyond the midpoint of the FVG. So, what we want is in our FVG, the price to come back and at least go to the middle point. Once it has been activated, meaning the midpoint has been hit, we place a buy order at the upper boundary of the FVG. It remains active until it is triggered or it is invalidated as per below or it expires at the closing of the day or whatever time the user has defined. And the invalidation of the fair value gap is only going to happen if the price comes to the midpoint, it's activated, but then it continues and breaks the lower boundary and closes below the fair value gap. When it is inactivated, cancel the buy order. The market did not respect the fair value gap, so we are not interested in trading it. Mark the FVG as invalid, keep it, but change the color to gray and do not allow any future entries from that fair value gap. Continue monitoring all the other valid fair value gaps, but forget about this one. All clear? And I told Claude not to code. Just let me know if it is all clear before we go to the next step, which is lot sizing. So, everything is clear, activation, invalidation, and expiry. Two things it wanted to flag. Is there going to be one order per FVG or one order total? And secondly, if the already activated FVG is re-entered, meaning the price enters, activates it, exits, and then comes back, which cannot happen actually. So, I said expiry, yes, let's ask the user for that. Call it the closing time. And let's change all of the end of the day resets to this expiry time as well. The default value is zero, which is the end of the day broker time. Then your flag number one, one order or more is one order per FVG. And if we haven't already, then let's also put the max number of trades allowed per symbol and max number of trades allowed per EA because we don't want to end up with seven FVGs on a day or eight FVGs or 10 FVGs on a day. And for flag number two, which is what happens if an already activated FVG is reentered, which is like once the price touches the midpoint and the order is placed, the FVG is active, it only gets invalidated if the price goes below it and closes below it. Otherwise, as long as the price is stays in the FVG, it should still remain active. So, crystal clear, confirming back everything. One small thing before we go to lot sizing, which is when the price re-touches the midpoint of an already active FVG, what do we do? And I said, \\\"Just ignore it. Once activated, it's active until triggered, invalidated, or the closing time reached.\\\" So, perfect. Let's go on to position sizing. So, our step seven. Now, position sizing is determined from the account risk. So, you take the percentage risk. The first FVG after the sweep receives the full one. So, if the user has defined 2%, the first fair value gap that is identified will get a stop order with a lot size which is risking 2% as the user has defined. But then, every subsequent FVG receives a reduced risk according to a risk decay factor. If your risk decay factor is 0.5, first FVG when placing the buy order will have a lot size according 2% risk. The next FVG will have a lot size based on 1% risk, half. The next FVG will have a lot size which is going to be risking 0.5. So, every time half the risks or whatever the user has defined as the risk decay factor. And FVG numbering is determined by the creation order. So, whichever one is created first is going to get the bigger treatment, whichever is going to create later is going to get a a smaller lot size. And the stop loss is going to go below the lower boundary of the FVG. Again, we're talking about the buy setup, the sell setup is the inverse. And the distance of the stop loss below the FVG is based on the FVG width multiplied by a user-defined multiplier. Meaning, if the user says one, then you take the FVG. Here is your buy order. Here is your lower boundary. Here is the width. Take that width one more time and put the stop loss below. And the take profit is going to be calculated using a configured risk to reward ratio, which the user is going to define. If multiple positions are open, then we're going to revise the TP into one unified TP based on the total dollar risk at this point in time and collectively that risk to reward ratio. Any concerns? And Claude needed a lot of clarification. So, first the risk decay. What does it mean? As an example, so 2% and the risk decay is 0.5. So, fair value gap one is full 2% risk. Fair value gap two is half, meaning 1%. Fair value gap three is half of that 1% 0.5. Is that the decay pattern? Or are we reducing 0.5 every time? So, from two to 1.5 to one to one to 0.5 to zero. To which I said, risk decay is yes, your example is correct. This is how I want it. Then on the stop loss, just confirming that the stop loss is going to be wherever the lower boundary minus the width of the FVG times a multiplier. So, if the FVG is 10 pip wide and the multiplier is 0.5, the SL is going to be five pip below the lower boundary. Which is correct. So, I said yes. And then on the TP, it gave me an example and let's suppose the position one risked $100, position two risked $$50. So, the collective risk is 150. So, do we unify the TP as 150 times whatever risk to reward ratio the user has said? I said yes. If it is risk to reward two, then given your example of 150 risk, the total profit needs to be $300. So, we adjust the unified TP as a weighted average. To which Claude had another question that what happens if one of the position is stopped and the second position is still running. To which my point was, keep the original unified TP because we are aiming for the day's risk to reward ratio. So, if today we have a risk 150, the TP should be 300. If one of the position is closed, fine. We still target the same unified TP. Perfect. Everything is clear. It has started doing its thing. What is updated in step six to nine? And then gave me the codes. So, I copy it, and go to MetaEditor, and we're going to save it as 1.09 because the step six to nine are all together in this one. Paste it and compile. And we got 10 errors. So, let's copy all these errors and just paste them back to Claude. So, Claude has started taking two issues to fix. The order select method is clashes with the MQL built-in, so we need to rename it. And the trade.set comment is not a valid C trade method, so comment should go directly into the buy stop and sell stop calls. Updating. And the new file. Let's copy this one, go back to MetaEditor, paste, compile, and this time it works perfectly. Okay, let's look at the inputs tab again. What has been added? So, the strategy is silver bullet cut-off time 10:00. Closing time is now user definition. Default is 0000, which is the end of the day. Close the open positions at closing time, true or false, let them run or not. How many candles within a liquidity sweep is the maximum? Fractal look back, how many candles look back? The MSS confirmation in time lapse, is there a limit? Minimum fair value gap width, then maximum number of trades we added, and now that is percentages. So, 1% as default, and the risk decay factor is 0.5. The stop loss multiplier is one. The risk to reward ratio, show the lines in which color, keep the history, yes or no, and the color for the fair value gap, bullish and bearish. But before we go ahead and run it, one more thing that I will test it, but for the visual test it's best not to delete any chart object. So, the day's high, low, MSS level arrows. I want to see everything in the history. So, it updated the codes. Let's copy it. Go back to Meta Editor, paste it, compile. Everything seems fine. So, let's run the test. So, here after the liquidity sweep, our MSS sell level is confirmed. And when the price comes back into the fair value gap and touches the midpoint, a sell stop has been placed. The stop loss has gone above the fair value gap and with a buffer which is the size of the fair value gap itself because we use the multiplier as one. And when the trade is taken, we have the update of the TP, which is 1:2 risk to reward as we have defined in our settings. Now, let's look at the buy side. And here we see that once once the price moves back into our fair value gap midpoint, the buy order is placed. The stop loss goes below. And once the trade is triggered, we have the update of the TP as 1:2 risk to reward ratio. But one thing which I'm noticing is that all of the historical stuff is still getting deleted. So, let's go back to Claude. The day high, low, sweep arrows are still getting deleted. So, Claude said, \\\"Okay, let me find everything remaining.\\\" He started working on the entire thing, made all the changes, root cause, fixed them, and then the files again. Copy, go back to Meta Editor, paste it. Compile. And let's run. And now I can see that all of the previous structures and lines and confirmations and the arrows, they're all being kept. Brilliant. Let's run it a little bit longer. This is where I notice one thing which was that on the 13th of Feb, something strange happened. The pending order from the 12th of February, it [clears throat] survived somehow the day's closing, most likely because at the end of the day when we sent the cancellation, the market was already closed. So, even the broker received that message, the order could not be closed. And the second thing I'm noticing is that after taking the trade, the TP should be updated, but it is not getting updated, most likely because now the EA has forgotten about this pending order because it sent the cancellation, so it thinks that it's gone, so it's not it anymore. So, you have a case of a rogue trade which runs away on its own with a stop loss in place, but no TP. Then another thing I'm noticing is that in our settings, the max number of candles allowed to identify the liquidity sweep is three, but there are cases where the liquidity sweep is being confirmed even after 20 candles. So, that is strange as well. So, let's go back to Claude with the issue number 9.1, which is I see a trade which wasn't cancelled at the day close, most likely because the market was closed and the order was not received. So, I'm thinking either to put a buffer, meaning whatever is the broker close time minus 10 minutes to ensure the closing, or at the start of the next day do a check that there are no pending orders from the previous day on every candle until the cut off time to provide a little bit of grace period. Then secondly, I notice also that the same pending order from 9.1 that survived the day, when it was triggered, it did not update the TP, most likely because the internal EA believes that everything is already closed. So, while we're checking after a new day on every candle, let's also check for open positions, and in case one survives, then assign the user-defined risk-to-reward ratio to it. And then 9.3, the liquidity sweep. We have it as default for three candles, but I am seeing that MSS unconfirmed are developing and the arrow sweeps appearing even in cases where the price went below the day's low and stayed there for 20 plus candles before moving back. So, something is seriously wrong. And then two more additions, which is 9.4, where we have the dash line for the day high and the low. Let's also put a vertical line at the cutoff time with the same color. So, it is easy to see visually where the cutoff time is. And then in the end because we are putting so many chart objects and keeping the history, which is good for the visual test, it's also good for the live charts, so you can see all of the history. But when you're going to run optimizations, these are going to slow the optimization down massively. So, in case of optimization, then no chart objects are created at all. So, Claude started thinking orders are waving the day close. Let's go ahead with a safety sweep that runs every candle from the day start until the cutoff, canceling everything. Then for the positions are waving the TP, in case if it survives, do we give it the TP as entry plus minus the stop loss distance times the risk to reward ratio? So, just treat it like a single position. Then for the sweep after the 20 candle, that's a proper bug, so it will have to investigate it fully. Then the vertical cutoff line, it will add and hide all the objects during optimization, it will add as well. So, now let me investigate 9.3 first. So, it has started, found the bug, came back with a proposed fix, and asked me, \\\"Does it match my intent?\\\" Which it did. So, I said, \\\"Yes, cancel all the pending orders. Yes, ideally the sweep from the 9.1 will solve the issue with with the runaway trade for the TP, but in case then yes, put the TP as the formula that you suggested just to be sure. And then for the investigation, yes, let's properly investigate the bug.\\\" So, Claude has started investigating the liquidity sweep candles properly, made all the changes that it needed to make, and gave me the code files again. So, let's copy it, and I will save this file as version 1.095 because we are at a step 9.5, adding five more things to it. Paste, compile. Okay, let's go to settings and I will change the liquidity sweep max candle to look back from three to 10. And now let's run. So here, for example, I mean the liquidity sweep happened, but it took more than 10 candles. So the system is not recognizing this as a liquidity sweep, which is perfect. The only problem I see is that this cutoff line, it is going from the top of the chart to the bottom of the chart. While I would like to have it between the day high and the day low only. So let's go back to Claude. Great. Everything seems to be working fine. Just one thing, the vertical line for the cutoff time is going from the top of the chart to the bottom of the chart. I would like it to be between the day's high and day's low only. So good, and it generated the code file again. Copy, paste it in MQL, compile, and run. And now we see that the cutoff lines are being drawn properly only between day's high and day's low. Brilliant. I think we've got everything. Just one last thing, I like my charts prettied up. So I'm giving Claude our revert to mean EA, which has this beautiful gradient color, and I'm going to ask it to use my attached EA and take the concept of the gradient across the chart and implement it into our new silver bullet EA. So Claude says, \\\"I like it. Have three questions. Which direction do you want the bands? Horizontal, like the attached EA? The color? Black to blue, same as the attached EA? And should there be a toggle?\\\" And no, always on, just match the EA's behavior. Claude gets to working, tells me what it has changed, and gave me the final code, which is 2,048 lines of code in probably less than 3 hours. Copy. Let's go back to MetaEditor, our final file, and I'm going to call this version 1.10 with gradient. Save, paste, compile, and let's run. And now we have this beautiful ICT fair value gap trading bot. Writing it myself, it would have probably taken me at least a week to write it. With Claude, it took me roughly around 4 to 5 hours. Now, very important for those who are looking to download, yes, I will make it available in the store, but and it's a big but, I just wrote this EA. I have no golden set file that's going to rain money forever. I receive a lot of emails every day saying something along the lines of I downloaded the code file, why am I not rich yet? I don't know which part of these videos make the promise that downloading the EA equals money raining forever. I share what I have and what I find interesting. A lot of you ask me to make these files available so you can use them as a reference, so I do that. But I am not able to take the responsibility of making everybody who watches this video and downloads the EA rich. So, stay safe and trade safe.
